Executive Summary

The Paris Agreement on climate change, which entered into force in November 2016,
is at its heart an agreement about energy. Transformative change in the energy sector,
the source of at least two-thirds of greenhouse-gas emissions, is essential to reach the
objectives of the Agreement. The changes already underway in the energy sector,
demonstrating the promise and potential of low-carbon energy, in turn lend credibility
to meaningful action on climate change. Growth in energy-related CO2 emissions stalled
completely in 2015. This was mainly due to a 1.8% improvement in the energy intensity of
the global economy, a trend bolstered by gains in energy efficiency, as well as the expanded
use of cleaner energy sources worldwide, mostly renewables. An increasing slice of the
roughly $1.8 trillion of investment each year in the energy sector has been attracted to
clean energy, at a time when investment in upstream oil and gas has fallen sharply. The
value of fossil-fuel consumption subsidies dropped in 2015 to $325 billion, from almost
$500 billion the previous year, reflecting lower fossil-fuel prices but also a subsidy reform
process that has gathered momentum in several countries.
The renewables-led transformation of the power sector has given focus to a new debate
over power market design and electricity security, while traditional energy security
concerns have not gone away. Adding in issues of energy access, affordability, climate
change and energy-related air pollution, as well as problems with public acceptance for
different types of energy projects, there are many trade-offs, co-benefits and competing
priorities that need to be untangled across the energy sector. This is the task that the
World Energy Outlook (WEO) takes up in different scenarios and case studies, with the
additional opportunity in 2016 to provide the first comprehensive examination of the
new era opened up by the Paris Agreement. All the Paris climate pledges, covering some
190 countries, have been examined in detail and incorporated into our main scenario.
More stringent decarbonisation options examined in WEO-2016 include not only the
450 Scenario (consistent with a 50% chance of limiting global warming to 2 °C) but also a
first examination of pathways that could limit warming further.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

The world’s energy needs continue to grow, but many millions are left behind
In our main scenario, a 30% rise in global energy demand to 2040 means an increase in
consumption for all modern fuels, but the global aggregates mask a multitude of diverse
trends and significant switching between fuels. Moreover, hundreds of millions of people
are still left in 2040 without basic energy services. Globally, renewable energy – the subject
of an in-depth focus in WEO-2016 – sees by far the fastest growth. Natural gas fares best
among the fossil fuels, with consumption rising by 50%. Growth in oil demand slows over
the projection period, but tops 103 million barrels per day (mb/d) by 2040. Coal use is hit
hard by environmental concerns and, after the rapid expansion of recent years, growth
essentially grinds to a halt. The increase in nuclear output is spurred mainly by deployment
in China. With total demand in OECD countries on a declining path, the geography of global
Executive Summary

21

energy consumption continues to shift towards industrialising, urbanising India, Southeast
Asia and China, as well as parts of Africa, Latin America and the Middle East. China and India
see the largest expansion of solar photovoltaics (PV); while by the mid-2030s developing
countries in Asia consume more oil than the entire OECD. Yet, despite intensified efforts in
many countries, large swathes of the global population are set to remain without modern
energy. More than half a billion people, increasingly concentrated in rural areas of subSaharan Africa, are still without access to electricity in 2040 (down from 1.2 billion today).
Around 1.8 billion remain reliant on solid biomass as a cooking fuel (down by a third on
today’s 2.7 billion); this means continued exposure to the smoky indoor environments that
are currently linked to 3.5 million premature deaths each year.

A new division of capital
A cumulative $44 trillion in investment is needed in global energy supply in our main
scenario, 60% of which goes to oil, gas and coal extraction and supply, including power
plants using these fuels, and nearly 20% to renewable energies. An extra $23 trillion
is required for improvements in energy efficiency. Compared with the period 20002015, when close to 70% of total supply investment went to fossil fuels, this represents
a significant reallocation of capital, especially given the expectation of continued cost
declines for key renewable energy technologies. The main stimulus for upstream oil and
gas investment is the decline in production from existing fields. In the case of oil, these are
equivalent to losing the current output of Iraq from the global balance every two years. In
the power sector, the relationship between electricity supply and generating capacity is
changing. A large share of future investment is in renewables-based capacity that tends to
run at relatively low utilisation rates, so every additional unit of electricity generated is set
to necessitate the provision of 40% more capacity than during the period 1990-2010. The
increased share of spending on capital-intensive technologies is balanced in most cases by
minimal operational expenditures, e.g. zero fuel costs for wind and solar power.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Climate pledges and climate goals
Countries are generally on track to achieve, and even exceed in some instances, many of
the targets set in their Paris Agreement pledges; this is sufficient to slow the projected
rise in global energy-related CO2 emissions, but not nearly enough to limit warming
to less than 2 °C. China’s transition to an economic model oriented towards domestic
consumption and services plays a critical role in shaping global trends. The build-up of
China’s infrastructure in recent decades relied heavily on energy-intensive industrial
sectors, notably steel and cement. However, energy demand from these sectors is now
past its high point, with the projected decline to 2040 bringing down China’s industrial coal
use in its wake. Almost all the growth in China’s power generation comes from sources
other than coal, whose share in the power mix falls from almost three-quarters today to
less than 45% in 2040. China’s energy-related CO2 emissions plateau, only slightly above
current levels. In India, coal’s share in the power mix drops from 75% to 55% over the
period to 2040, a major shift in a country that sees electricity demand more than triple
22

World Energy Outlook 2016

(compared with a “mere” 85% rise in China). Among the main developed economies,
the United States, the European Union and Japan look to be broadly on track to meet
their climate pledges, although delivering on further improvements in energy efficiency
will be vital. With a continued focus on full and timely implementation, the pledges are
sufficient in aggregate to limit the increase in global CO2 emissions to an annual average of
160 million tonnes. This is a marked reduction compared with the average annual rise of
650 million tonnes seen since 2000. But continued growth in energy-related CO2 emissions,
to 36 gigatonnes in 2040, self-evidently means that these pledges do not deliver the Paris
Agreement’s goal to reach a peak in emissions as soon as possible.

Efficiency is the motor of change
A step-change in the pace of decarbonisation and efficiency improvement is required
in the 450 Scenario, underlining the importance of the five-year review mechanism,
built into the Paris Agreement, for countries to increase the ambition of their climate
pledges. The frontlines for additional emissions reductions are in the power sector, via
accelerated deployment of renewables, nuclear power (where politically acceptable)
and carbon capture and storage; a strong push for greater electrification and efficiency
across all end-uses; and a robust and concerted clean energy research and development
effort by governments and companies. With regard to efficiency, we highlight in
WEO-2016 the potential for further improvement in the performance of electric motor
systems, which account for more than half of today’s electricity consumption in a range of
end-use applications (e.g. fans, compressors, pumps, vehicles, refrigerators). In the industrial
sector alone, additional cumulative investment of around $300 billion in the 450 Scenario
reduces 2040 global electricity demand by about 5% and avoids $450 billion in investment
in power generation. Capturing these energy savings requires a system-wide approach that
encompasses not only strict regulation of motors and motor-driven devices, but also larger
uptake of variable speed drives and the implementation by operators of other measures to
enhance the efficiency of the system as a whole, such as predictive maintenance.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Electric vehicles ready to move
Electricity takes an ever-larger share of the growth in final energy consumption: from just
over one-quarter over the last 25 years, electricity accounts for almost 40% of additional
consumption to 2040 in our main scenario and for two-thirds in the 450 Scenario. NonOECD countries account for more than 85% of the increase in electricity use in both
scenarios, but this is also one of the few energy carriers that gains ground within the
OECD. Although a small factor in total power demand, the projected rise of electricity
consumption in road transport is emblematic of the broader trend, as electric cars gain
consumer appeal, more models appear on the market and the cost gap with conventional
vehicles continues to narrow. The worldwide stock of electric cars reached 1.3 million in
2015, a near-doubling on 2014 levels. In our main scenario, this figure rises to more than
30 million by 2025 and exceeds 150 million in 2040, reducing 2040 oil demand by around
1.3 mb/d. Although battery costs continue to fall, supportive policies – which are far from
Executive Summary

23

universal for the moment – are still critical to encourage more consumers to choose electric
over conventional vehicles. If these policies, including tighter fuel-economy and emissions
regulations as well as financial incentives, become stronger and more widespread, as they
do in the 450 Scenario, the effect is to have some 715 million electric cars on the road by
2040, displacing 6 mb/d of oil demand.

Renewables break free
The electricity sector is the focus of many Paris pledges: nearly 60% of all new power
generation capacity to 2040 in our main scenario comes from renewables and, by 2040,
the majority of renewables-based generation is competitive without any subsidies. Rapid
deployment brings lower costs: solar PV is expected to see its average cost cut by a further
40-70% by 2040 and onshore wind by an additional 10-25%. Subsidies per unit of new solar
PV in China drop by three-quarters by 2025 and solar projects in India are competitive without
any support well before 2030. Subsidies to renewables are around $150 billion today, some
80% of which are directed to the power sector, 18% to transport and around 1% to heat.
With declining costs and an anticipated rise in end-user electricity prices, by the 2030s global
subsidies to renewables are on a declining trend from a peak of $240 billion. Renewables
also gain ground in providing heat, the largest component of global energy service demand,
meeting half of the growth to 2040. This is mainly in the form of bioenergy for industrial heat
in emerging economies in Asia; and solar thermal applications for water heating, already an
established choice in many countries, including China, South Africa, Israel and Turkey.
In the 450 Scenario, nearly 60% of the power generated in 2040 is projected to come
from renewables, almost half of this from wind and solar PV. The power sector is largely
decarbonised in this scenario: the average emissions intensity of electricity generation
drops to 80 grammes of CO2 per kWh in 2040, compared with 335 g CO2/kWh in our main
scenario, and 515 g CO2/kWh today. In the four largest power markets (China, the United
States, the European Union and India), variable renewables become the largest source
of generation, around 2030 in Europe and around 2035 in the other three countries. A
40% increase in generation from renewables, compared with our main scenario, comes
with only a 15% increase in cumulative subsidies and at little extra cost to consumers:
household electricity bills in the 450 Scenario are virtually unchanged from those in our
main scenario, thanks also to more efficient energy use.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

The policy focus shifts to integration
Cost reductions for renewables, on their own, will not be enough to secure an efficient
decarbonisation of electricity supply. Structural changes to the design and operation of the
power system are needed to ensure adequate incentives for investment and to integrate
high shares of variable wind and solar power. The rapid deployment of technologies with
low short-run costs, such as most renewables, increases the likelihood of sustained periods
of very low wholesale electricity prices. A careful review of market rules and structures is
required to ensure that generators have ways to recover their costs, and that the power
system is able to operate with the necessary degree of flexibility. Strengthening the grid,
24

World Energy Outlook 2016

incentivising system-friendly deployment of wind and solar, and ensuring the availability of
power plants ready to dispatch at short notice can efficiently accommodate the variability
of wind and solar output, up until they reach a share of around one-quarter in the power
mix. After this point, demand response and energy storage become essential to avoid wind
and solar installations having their operations curtailed in times of abundant generation.
In the absence of these additional measures, by the end of the Outlook period in the
450 Scenario curtailment could occur for up to one-third of the time in Europe and around
20% in the United States and India, potentially idling the equivalent of up to 30% of the
investment in new wind and solar plants. The timely deployment in this scenario of costeffective demand-side and storage measures, as part of a suite of system integration tools,
limits curtailment to below 2.5% of annual wind and solar output and paves the way for
deep decarbonisation of the power sector.

The 2 oC pathway is very tough: the road to 1.5 oC goes through uncharted territory
The challenges to achieve the 450 Scenario are immense, requiring a major reallocation
of investment capital going to the energy sector. The division of the $40 trillion in
cumulative energy supply investment in the 450 Scenario (some $4 trillion less than in
our main scenario) moves away from fossil fuels and towards renewables and other lowcarbon investments in nuclear and carbon capture and storage. By 2040, the share going to
fossil fuels drops towards one-third. In addition, $35 trillion is needed for improvements in
energy efficiency (an extra $12 trillion, compared with our main scenario). The 450 Scenario
puts the energy sector on course to reach a point, before the end of this century, when
all residual emissions from fuel combustion are either captured and stored, or offset by
technologies that remove carbon from the atmosphere. The more ambitious the target
for limiting global warming, the earlier this point of net-zero emissions has to be reached.
The transformation required for a reasonable chance of remaining within the temperature
goal of 1.5 °C is stark. It would require net-zero emissions at some point between 2040 and
2060 (even if negative emissions technologies can be deployed at scale), thus requiring
radical near-term reductions in energy sector CO2 emissions, employing every known
technological, societal and regulatory decarbonisation option.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Fossil fuels and the risks from the low-carbon transition
For the moment, the collective signal sent by governments in their climate pledges (and
therefore reflected in our main scenario) is that fossil fuels, in particular natural gas
and oil, will continue to be a bedrock of the global energy system for many decades to
come, but the fossil-fuel industry cannot afford to ignore the risks that might arise from a
sharper transition. While all fossil fuels see continued growth in our main scenario, by 2040
oil demand returns to the levels of the late 1990s in the 450 Scenario, at under 75 mb/d;
coal use falls back to levels last seen in the mid-1980s, at under 3 000 million tonnes of coal
equivalent per year; only gas sees an increase relative to today’s consumption level. A fully
fledged policy drive to decarbonise the energy system will have important consequences
for future revenues of fossil-fuel companies and exporting countries, but the exposure
Executive Summary

25

to risk varies across fuels and across different parts of the value chain. For example, the
capital at risk in the coal sector is concentrated in coal-fired power stations (for which
carbon capture and storage becomes an important asset protection strategy); the key risk
in the mining sector, which is much less capital-intensive, is to employment. Exporting
countries can take steps to reduce vulnerabilities by limiting their dependence on fossilfuel revenue, as Saudi Arabia is doing with its sweeping “Vision 2030” reform programme.
In the case of oil, we find no reason to assume widespread stranding of upstream oil assets
in the 450 Scenario, as long as governments give clear signals of their intent and pursue
consistent policies to that end. Investment in developing new upstream projects is an
important component of a least-cost transition, as the decline in output from existing fields
is much larger than the anticipated fall in demand. But the risks would increase sharply in
the event of sudden policy shifts, stop-and-go policy cycles or other circumstances that
lead companies to invest for demand that does not materialise.

Oil markets could be in for another bumpy ride

© OECD/IEA, 2016

A near-term risk to oil markets could arise from the opposite direction – a shortfall of new
projects – if the cuts in upstream spending in 2015-2016 are prolonged for another year. In
2015, the volume of conventional crude oil resources that received development approval fell
to its lowest level since the 1950s and the data available for 2016 show no sign of a rebound.
A lot of attention is focussed on the remarkable resilience of US tight oil output through the
current downturn and its potential ability, because of a short investment cycle, to respond
in a matter of months to movements in price. But there is a threat on the horizon to the
“baseload” of oil output, the conventional projects that operate on a different rhythm, with
lead times of three to six years from investment decision to first oil. We estimate that, if new
project approvals remain low for a third year in a row in 2017, then it becomes increasingly
unlikely that demand (as projected in our main scenario) and supply can be matched in the
early 2020s without the start of a new boom/bust cycle for the industry.
Over the longer term, oil demand in our main scenario concentrates in freight, aviation
and petrochemicals, areas where alternatives are scarce, while oil supply – despite a
strong outlook for US tight oil – increasingly concentrates in the Middle East. There
are few substitutes for oil products as a fuel for trucks and planes and as a feedstock
for the chemicals industry; these three sectors account for all of the growth in global oil
consumption. Total demand from OECD countries falls by almost 12 mb/d to 2040, but
this reduction is more than offset by increases elsewhere. India, the largest source of
future demand growth, sees oil consumption rise by 6 mb/d. On the supply side, projected
US tight oil output has been revised upwards, remaining higher for longer than in last
year’s Outlook, although non-OPEC production as a whole still goes into retreat from the
early 2020s. OPEC is presumed to return to a policy of active market management, but
nonetheless sees its share of global production rising towards 50% by 2040. The world
becomes increasingly reliant on expansion in Iran (which reaches 6 mb/d in 2040) and Iraq
(7 mb/d in 2040) to balance the market. The focus for oil trade shifts decisively to Asia: the
United States all but eliminates net imports of oil by 2040.
26

World Energy Outlook 2016

A truly global gas market is coming into view
A 1.5% annual rate of growth in natural gas demand to 2040 is healthy compared with
the other fossil fuels, but markets, business models and pricing arrangements are all in
flux. A more flexible global market, linked by a doubling of trade in liquefied natural gas
(LNG), supports an expanded role for gas in the global mix. Gas consumption increases
almost everywhere, with the main exception of Japan where it falls back as nuclear power
is reintroduced. China (where consumption grows by more than 400 billion cubic metres)
and the Middle East are the largest sources of growth. But questions abound about how
quickly a market currently awash with gas can rebalance, especially with another 130 bcm
of liquefaction capacity under construction, primarily in the United States and Australia.
Our Outlook assumes a marked change from the previous system of strong, fixed-term
relationships between suppliers and a defined group of customers, in favour of more
competitive and flexible arrangements, including greater reliance on prices set by gas-togas competition. This shift is catalysed by the increasing availability of footloose US LNG
cargoes and the arrival in the 2020s of other new exporters, notably in East Africa, as
well as the diversity brought to global supply by the continued, if uneven, spread of the
unconventional gas revolution. Floating storage and regasification units help to unlock
new and smaller markets for LNG, whose overall share in long-distance gas trade grows
from 42% in 2014 to 53% in 2040. But uncertainty over the direction of this commercial
transition could delay decisions on new upstream and transportation projects, posing the
risk of a hard landing for markets once the current oversupply is absorbed. Export-oriented
producers have to work hard to control costs in the face of strong competition from other
fuels, especially in the power sector. In the mid-2020s, in gas-importing countries in Asia,
new gas plants would be a cheaper option than new coal plants for baseload generation
only if coal prices were $150/tonne (double the anticipated 2025 price). The space for gasfired generation is also squeezed by the rising deployment and falling costs of renewables.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Coal: a rock in a hard place
With no global upturn in demand in sight for coal, the search for market equilibrium
depends on cuts to supply capacity, mainly in China and the United States. There are
stark regional contrasts in the coal demand outlook. Some higher income economies, often
with flat or declining overall energy needs, make large strides in displacing coal with lowercarbon alternatives. Coal demand in the European Union and the United States (which
together account for around one-sixth of today’s global coal use) falls by over 60% and
40%, respectively, over the period to 2040. Meanwhile, lower income economies, notably
India and countries in Southeast Asia, need to mobilise multiple sources of energy to meet
fast growth in consumption; as such they cannot afford, for the moment, to neglect a lowcost source of energy even as they pursue others in parallel. China is in the process of
moving from the latter group of countries to the former, resulting in a decline of almost
15% in its coal demand over the Outlook period. China is also instrumental to the way
that the coal market finds a new equilibrium, after the abrupt end to the coal boom of
the 2000s. China is administering a number of measures to cut mining capacity, a move
Executive Summary

27

that has already pushed coal prices higher in 2016 (after four straight years of decline).
If, however, the social costs of this transition prove too high, China could ease the pace
of supply cuts, raising the possibility of China becoming a coal exporter in order to get rid
of surplus output: this would prolong the slump in the international market. Alongside
measures to increase coal-plant efficiency and reduce pollutant emissions, the long-term
future of coal is increasingly tied to the commercial availability of carbon capture and
storage, as only abated coal use is compatible with deep decarbonisation.

Energy and water: one doesn’t flow without the other

© OECD/IEA, 2016

The inter-dependencies between energy and water are set to intensify in the coming
years, as the water needs of the energy sector – and the energy needs of the water
sector – both rise. Water is essential for all phases of energy production: the energy sector
is responsible for 10% of global water withdrawals, mainly for power plant operation as
well as for production of fossil fuels and biofuels. These requirements grow over the period
to 2040, especially for water that is consumed (i.e. that is withdrawn but not returned
to a source). In the power sector there is a switch to advanced cooling technologies that
withdraw less water, but consume more. A rise in biofuels demand pushes up water use
and greater deployment of nuclear power increases both withdrawal and consumption
levels. On the other side of the energy-water equation, the WEO analysis provides a first
systematic global estimate of the amount of energy used to supply water to consumers. In
2014, some 4% of global electricity consumption was used to extract, distribute and treat
water and wastewater, along with 50 million tonnes of oil equivalent of thermal energy,
mostly diesel used for irrigation pumps and gas in desalination plants. Over the period to
2040, the amount of energy used in the water sector is projected to more than double.
Desalination capacity rises sharply in the Middle East and North Africa and demand for
wastewater treatment (and higher levels of treatment) grows, especially in emerging
economies. By 2040, 16% of electricity consumption in the Middle East is related to water
supply.
Managing energy-water linkages is pivotal to the prospects for successful realisation of
a range of development and climate goals. There are several connections between the
new United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) on clean water and sanitation
(SDG 6) and affordable and clean energy (SDG 7) that, if managed well, can help with the
attainment of both sets of goals. There are also many economically viable opportunities
for energy and water savings that can relieve pressures on both systems, if considered
in an integrated manner. Efforts to tackle climate change can exacerbate water stress in
some cases, or be limited by water availability. Some low-carbon technologies, such as
wind and solar PV, require very little water; but the more a decarbonisation pathway relies
on biofuels, concentrating solar power, carbon capture or nuclear power, the more water
it consumes. As a result, despite lower energy demand, water consumption in 2040 in the
450 Scenario is slightly higher than in our main scenario.

28

World Energy Outlook 2016

PART A
GLOBAL ENERGY TRENDS

PREFACE

Part A of this WEO (Chapters 1-9) presents energy projections to 2040. It covers the
prospects for all energy sources, regions and sectors and considers the implications for
climate change, energy security and the economy. The main focus is on the New Policies
Scenario – the central scenario in WEO-2016. The main alternative scenario is the
450 Scenario (consistent with a 50% chance of limiting global warming to 2 °C), which is
accompanied by a first examination of pathways that could limit warming further.
Chapter 1 defines the scenarios and details the policy, technology, macroeconomic
and demographic assumptions utilised in the analysis.
Chapter 2 provides an overview of key findings in the form of ten questions and
answers about the future of energy, asking what impact different policy and investment
choices might have on future energy trends and risks.
Chapter 3 analyses the outlook for oil and what the recent price downturn, lowered
investment and the decisions made at COP21 might mean for tomorrow’s market
balances.
Chapter 4 focuses on the outlook for natural gas and asks whether or not a truly global
gas market is emerging.
Chapter 5 analyses the future of coal, including the impact that the ongoing structural
shift in China’s economy and policies to combat local air pollution and climate change
have on major producing and consuming countries.
Chapter 6 looks at the future prospects for the power sector and how the interactions
between low-carbon sources of electricity and power generated by fossil fuels affect
investment, generation and prices.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Chapter 7 examines recent trends and future prospects for energy efficiency, with an
in-depth focus on electric motor systems.
Chapter 8 evaluates what the climate pledges made in Paris mean for long-term
energy and emission trends. In addition it explores the challenges associated with
reaching temperature targets beyond a 2 °C trajectory.
Chapter 9 assesses current and future freshwater requirements for the energy sector,
and, for the first time, provides a systematic global estimate of the amount of energy
used in the water sector.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Chapter 1
Introduction and scope
Mapping a changing energy landscape
Highlights

• In a momentous period for global energy, the entry into force of the Paris Agreement
in November 2016 was a milestone in the international effort to tackle climate
change, deployment of wind and solar technologies reached record levels and
governments reaffirmed their intention to ensure universal energy access by 2030.
An overhang of supply maintained downward pressure on fossil-fuel prices, even as
lower hydrocarbon revenues curbed investment in new oil and gas projects. Among
the major consumers, India’s energy needs continued to grow rapidly, while China’s
transition to a less energy-intensive economy gathered speed.

• Our main scenario in WEO-2016, the New Policies Scenario, incorporates existing
energy policies as well as an assessment of the results likely to stem from the
implementation of announced intentions, notably those in the climate pledges
submitted for COP21. The Current Policies Scenario includes only those policies firmly
enacted as of mid-2016; this default setting for the energy system is a benchmark
against which the impact of “new” policies can be measured. The 450 Scenario
demonstrates a pathway to limit long-term global warming to 2 °C above preindustrial levels: we also provide a first assessment of what it would take to reach
even more ambitious goals, including a 1.5 °C target.

• Alongside energy policies, which differ between scenarios, the rates at which GDP and
population are assumed to grow are the principal determinants of energy demand
growth. In WEO-2016, global GDP is assumed to grow at a compound average rate
of 3.4% per year, slightly below the level assumed in last year’s Outlook. The world
population rises from 7.3 billion in 2015 to 9.2 billion in 2040, with India overtaking
China in the early 2020s as the most populous country.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

• Energy prices and technology costs vary by scenario, responding to different market
dynamics and policies. In the New Policies Scenario, balancing supply and demand
requires an oil price approaching $80/barrel in 2020 and further gradual increases
thereafter. As the natural gas market globalises, so the various regional prices start
to move in tandem, with the US market – where the price rises above $6/MBtu by
the late 2030s – increasingly serving as a global reference point. The rebound in coal
prices is the slowest, with steam coal imports rising towards $90/tonne by 2040.
The projections are very sensitive to the way in which technology learning affects
supply costs, including the cost of investing in energy efficiency. Today’s progress
with deployment of low-carbon technologies is reflected in higher penetration of
solar and wind in our projections, compared with WEO-2015; but fewer power plants
are equipped with carbon capture and storage.

Chapter 1 | Introduction and scope

31

1.1 Defining the scenarios
This 2016 edition of the World Energy Outlook (WEO) looks out across an energy landscape
in flux. The Paris Agreement on climate change, which entered into force in November
2016, brings together countries representing almost all of the world’s greenhouse-gas
emissions and energy use: it represents a strong signal of the determination of governments
around the world to reduce emissions by accelerating the transition to a cleaner and more
efficient energy system. The goals set out in Paris, and the measures that governments
have announced to achieve them, significantly influence the projections in this year’s WEO.
Evidence of the momentum behind the energy transition goes beyond the signatures on
the Paris Agreement: the latest energy data – on which this WEO is based – show how
investment in low-carbon and more efficient technologies is having a tangible influence on
energy trends. 2015 saw additions of renewable power generation capacity exceed those of
fossil fuels. The number of electric cars on the road passed one million. Most significantly,
the data for 2014 and 2015 suggested that what was once a very predictable relationship
between rising economic activity, growth in energy demand and energy-related carbondioxide (CO2) emissions is starting to weaken.
While the energy transition is unmistakeably gathering momentum, it also has a long
way to go. In the power sector, which has the least complicated path to decarbonisation,
average investment costs in solar power have fallen between 40% and 80% since 2010,
yet solar power still accounts for barely 1% of electricity generation worldwide. In the
end-use sectors, alternative fuels and technologies have been even slower to gain ground:
1.3 million electric vehicles is an impressive milestone, but it is only around 0.1% of the
global car fleet. Oil, coal and natural gas still account for more than 80% of primary energy
demand - a share that has barely moved over the last 25 years. Fossil fuels are abundant
(particularly coal, the most carbon-intensive of the three main fossil fuels) and – for the
moment at least – relatively cheap. The effects of the tight oil and shale gas revolutions in
the United States continue to reverberate across global markets, providing a reminder that
innovation and cost reduction are not solely the preserve of renewable energy technologies.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Decarbonisation of the energy system is one of a number of energy-related policy priorities
being pursued by governments around the world. In September 2015, countries marked
the 70th anniversary of the creation of the United Nations with agreement on new
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), including the commitment in SDG 7 to “ensure
access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all” by 2030. As the WEO
has emphasised over many years, the absence of universal energy access is a lamentable
failure of the world’s energy system, with around one-in-six people in the world lacking
access to electricity and two-in-five risking their health in the smoky environments caused
by cooking over open fires using solid biomass as fuel.
Those without access to energy experience the most profound example of energy insecurity,
but concerns about the security and reliability of energy provision extend much more widely.
Hundreds of millions of people face daily interruptions to electricity supply, compromising
their ability to light and cool their homes and interrupting the activity of their firms or
32

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

farms. Two consecutive years of declining upstream oil and gas investment in 2015 and 2016
similarly raise concerns about the adequacy of future supply – as do political tensions and
instability in major resource-rich countries such as Iraq, Libya, Nigeria and Venezuela.
This is still far from an exhaustive list of the different pressures on energy markets and decisionmakers. Consumers prize reliable, affordable energy, so governments typically place a high
priority on minimising the costs of energy provision, especially in uncertain economic times.
In many countries, the immediate energy-related environmental concern is air pollution –
the subject of a special report in the WEO-2016 series (IEA, 2016a). Even well-laid plans for
the future are liable to be disrupted by changes in key energy technologies, particularly as
governments and industry step up their efforts to promote clean energy innovation. Public
acceptance is a major constraint on policy adoption and implementation: fossil fuels are most
subject to criticism, but they are not alone in facing an uncertain and difficult future.
With so many uncertainties and (occasionally competing) priorities, no path of development
of the global energy system can be confidently drawn to 2040. That is why as in previous
years, this edition of the World Energy Outlook presents several scenarios. The structure
of the main scenarios is retained from previous Outlooks, in order to provide continuity
and comparability with previous analysis, but the underlying assumptions have been
reviewed carefully to reflect the post-Paris expectations for international co-operation on
climate change. The three main global scenarios – Current Policies Scenario, New Policies
Scenario and 450 Scenario – are supplemented by a first discussion of pathways that
could limit global warming to well below 2 °C and 1.5 °C. The primary focus, as in past
editions, is on the New Policies Scenario, which reflects both currently adopted measures
and, to a degree, declared policy intentions. In addition to the core scenarios, WEO-2016
also includes multiple case studies and sensitivity analyses, introduced in the individual
chapters, to shed light on specific topics.

New Policies Scenario
Based on a detailed review of policy announcements and plans, the New Policies Scenario
reflects the way that governments, individually or collectively, see their energy sectors
developing over the coming decades. Its starting point is the policies and measures that
are already in place, but it also takes into account, in full or in part, the aims, targets and
intentions that have been announced, even if these have yet to be enshrined in legislation
or the means for their implementation are still taking shape.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

The climate pledges, known as Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs)1, that are the
building blocks of the Paris Agreement provide a rich and authoritative source of guidance for
this scenario. They have been carefully and individually assessed for this edition of the WEO.
Where policies exist to support them and the implementing measures are clearly defined, the
1. Formally, the Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDCs) submitted for the Paris Agreement will become
Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) when each Party ratifies the Agreement. This Outlook uses the term NDC
to refer to both cases (INDCs and NDCs).

Chapter 1 | Introduction and scope

33

1

effects are reflected in the New Policies Scenario. Where considerable uncertainties persist,
how far and how fast the policy commitments are met depends upon our assessment of
the political, regulatory, market, infrastructure and financing constraints; in such cases, the
announced targets may, in our Outlook, be met later than proclaimed or not at all. On the
other hand, there are also cases in which energy demand, macroeconomic circumstances
and/or cost trends lead countries to go further and faster than their stated ambitions.
The projections in the New Policies Scenario signal to policy-makers and other stakeholders
the direction in which today’s policy ambitions are likely to take the energy sector. This
does not, however, make this scenario a forecast – a point that needs constantly to be kept
in mind. Alongside other uncertainties, like the pace of economic growth and technology
change, adjustments will be made to policies affecting energy consumption and the
evolution of the power sector in the future, beyond those already announced, responding to
new circumstances or priorities. We do not attempt to anticipate such future shifts in policy2
or to predict major technological change; indeed, to do so would be to undermine the value
and purpose of this scenario. The New Policies Scenario is not a normative scenario: it
does not depict a future that the International Energy Agency (IEA) deems desirable or one
that policy-makers or other stakeholders should try to bring into being. It provides a wellfounded basis for expectations about the future and thereby also serves as an invitation
for improvement: if the outcomes described are sub-optimal or, even, unacceptable, then
policies and other conditions and factors need to change. Our intention in the World Energy
Outlook is to stimulate those changes through evidence-based analysis.

Current Policies Scenario
The accomplishment of announced, new policy targets cannot be taken for granted.
The Current Policies Scenario depicts a path for the global energy system shorn of the
implementation of any new policies or measures beyond those already supported by
specific implementing measures in place as of mid-2016. No allowance is then made for
additional implementing measures or changes in policy beyond this point, except that – as
with the New Policies Scenario – when current measures are specifically time-bound and
expire, they are not normally assumed to lapse on expiry, but are continued at a similar
level of intensity through to 2040.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Where policies taken into account in the Current Policies Scenario leave scope for a range of
possible outcomes, this scenario assumes that only the lower level of ambition is attained.
That is, this scenario not only describes a world in which there are no new policies, but
also one in which the implementation of some existing commitments is sluggish. It depicts,
for example, a world without the implementation of many of the policy changes promised
at the United Nations Framework Convention in Climate Change (UNFCCC) Conference of
2. A partial exception relates to fossil-fuel supply, where there is a generic assumption, in all scenarios, that governments
make efforts to stimulate domestic production where resources and market conditions offer opportunities to do so. Such
efforts are subject to policy and political constraints, including public acceptance, that are taken into account, but the
outcome may involve assuming the development of resources that are not currently foreseen for exploitation.
34

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

the Parties in Paris (COP21). This is likewise not a prediction but, rather, a “default setting”
for the global energy system, with little or no change to settled, established positions. In
this way, the Current Policies Scenario provides a benchmark against which the impact of
“new” policies can be measured.

Decarbonisation scenarios
The decarbonisation scenarios examined in this Outlook are quite different in approach
from those discussed above. The New Policies Scenario and Current Policies Scenario start
with certain assumptions on policy and then see where they take the energy sector. The
decarbonisation scenarios start from a certain vision of where the energy sector needs to end
up and then work back to the present. The decarbonisation scenario described in detail in
WEO-2016 is the 450 Scenario, which has the objective of limiting the average global
temperature increase in 2100 to 2 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels.3 A 2 °C target
was mentioned explicitly in the Cancun Agreements in 2010 (the first time that it appeared in
a document agreed under the UNFCCC framework4) and it has also been used as a yardstick in
reports from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. As such, it has become a widely
recognised benchmark for government policies and company strategies on climate change.
With this in mind, and to provide continuity with previous WEOs, the 450 Scenario retains
a prominent position in this Outlook. We have, though, revisited important features of this
450 Scenario in the light of progress with the deployment of key low-carbon technologies.
As described in more detail in Chapter 8 and Chapters 10-12, the 450 Scenario in WEO-2016
relies more heavily on renewables, in particular wind and solar, to achieve the necessary
reduction in energy-related CO2 emissions. It relies less than in the past on the deployment
of carbon capture and storage (CCS), given the slow pace at which this technology is being
tested and deployed in practice, and the constraint that this implies on the pace of its
future growth. The results of the 450 Scenario are a point of reference throughout this
report, as well in the detailed tables in Annex A.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

In addition to the 450 Scenario, WEO-2016 includes a first appraisal (but not yet in the
detail required for a full scenario) of two more ambitious emissions reduction pathways,
derived from the Paris Agreement (Box 1.1). These would aim to limit warming to “well
below 2 °C” and to 1.5 °C, respectively.5 While the goal of the latter is well defined, to
3. The 450 Scenario was first introduced in WEO-2008 at a time when climate targets were typically expressed in
terms of the concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. This set out an energy pathway aiming to limit
the concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere to around 450 parts per million of CO2 equivalent. To reflect
changes in the public and academic discourse surrounding climate change mitigation, the 450 Scenario is now expressed
as realising a 50% chance of limiting warming to a 2 °C temperature rise in 2100. This is consistent with the previous
concentration-based objective.
4. Article 2 of the 1992 UN Framework Convention on Climate Change committed the Parties to “stabilisation of
greenhouse-gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference
with the climate system”, without specifying what such a concentration might be.
5. Chapter 8 presents some initial findings in these areas. However, further research is required, in close collaboration
with other relevant stakeholders, in order to understand in more detail the ways that such pathways could be achieved.
This work is in hand.

Chapter 1 | Introduction and scope

35

1

date there is no commonly agreed definition of what would constitute a “well below
2 °C” outcome: this discussion is expected to gather momentum in political and scientific
circles over the coming months and years. Pending the outcome of this debate, WEO-2016
explores a trajectory with a 66% probability of limiting the global temperature rise in 2100
to below 2 °C, rather than the 50% chance offered by the 450 Scenario: that is, a trajectory
with a higher likelihood of over achievement or, in other words, a higher prospect of a
temperature rise less than 2 °C.
Box 1.1 ⊳ Key provisions of the Paris climate change agreement

The accord reached in December 2015 at the Paris UNFCCC conference (COP21) was the
culmination of a long and complicated negotiating process. The agreement, referred
to as the “Paris Agreement”, was already ratified by a sufficient number of Parties
(the threshold of 55 Parties accounting for at least 55% of total global greenhouse-gas
emissions) to allow it to enter into force on 4 November 2016, just before the start of
the COP22 in Marrakech, Morocco.
The Paris Agreement sets out the common goal to limit global warming and identifies
ways in which this might be achieved. It aims to strengthen the global response to the
threat of climate change, by:
“Holding the increase in the global average temperature to well below 2 °C
above pre-industrial levels and pursuing efforts to limit the temperature
increase to 1.5 °C above pre-industrial levels.”

Countries are committed to reach this goal via “global peaking of greenhouse-gas
emissions as soon as possible”, recognising that this will take longer for developing
countries, and then by reducing emissions rapidly to a point – sometime in the secondhalf of this century – when the world achieves a balance between anthropogenic
emissions and their removal by sinks, by means of measures such as afforestation or
carbon capture and storage.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

How is this goal to be achieved? The main mechanism is via Nationally Determined
Contributions (NDCs), the pledges made in advance of Paris that outlined climate
ambitions and which, implicitly or explicitly, include commitments relating to the
energy sector. The first round of NDCs for the period from 2020 are formalised when
countries ratify or accede to the Agreement; subsequent NDCs will be communicated
every five years, with the next round set by 2020.
To facilitate implementation of the NDCs, particularly in developing countries, the Paris
Agreement established various complementary obligations and mechanisms related to
finance (the commitment to mobilise $100 billion per year in climate-related finance
by 2020 was extended to 2025), capacity-building and technology development and
transfer. Outside the formal Agreement framework, 20 countries and the European
Union also agreed to double their clean energy research and development spending

36

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

over the next five years as part of Mission Innovation, supported by commitments by
companies – like those in the Breakthrough Energy Coalition – to invest capital in earlystage technology development.
The Paris Agreement includes provisions on adaptation to climate change, marketbased emissions reduction mechanisms (establishing a successor to the Clean
Development Mechanism), the roles of non-state actors and the need to achieve
universal access to sustainable energy. There is also a unified system to track progress,
with all countries reporting regularly on their emissions, progress with implementation
of NDCs and adaptation actions.

1.2 Developing the scenarios

© OECD/IEA, 2016

The World Energy Model (WEM) generates the energy projections used in this report.6
The WEM is a large-scale simulation tool, developed in-house at the IEA over a period
of more than 20 years, designed to replicate how energy markets function. It covers the
whole energy system in detail, allowing the analysis to focus not only on global or regional
aggregates but also to zoom in on a multitude of indicators, such as the roles of distinct
technologies and end-uses, the evolution of power sector and end-user prices, and the
implications of different pathways for investment, trade and greenhouse-gas emissions.
The current version models global energy demand in 25 regions, 12 of which are individual
countries. Global oil and gas supply is modelled in 120 distinct countries and regions, while
global coal supply is modelled in 31 countries and regions. In addition to the main modules
covering energy demand, fossil fuel and bioenergy supply, and energy transformation,
there are supplementary tools to amplify the analytical capacity. The model is updated and
enhanced each year in order to reflect ever more closely how energy markets operate and
how they might evolve. The major changes introduced for the WEO-2016 include:


A new, more granular model of the power market, developed for the special focus on
renewable energy, to assess the scope for the integration of variable renewables and
the related costs (see Chapters 10-12). This allows for a more detailed understanding
of the implications of seasonal, daily and hourly variations in the output of certain
renewable energy technologies, notably wind and solar, in different markets and the
flexibility that is required of other power system components.



A detailed stock model for industrial electric motor-driven systems, enabling explicit
modelling of the impact of policies on elements including the motor, the driven
equipment, the use of a variable speed drive and system-wide improvements.



A new sub-module for international shipping, developed in collaboration with the
IEA’s Mobility Model (MoMo).



More detailed representation of renewable energy heat applications in various end-uses.

6. For details on the WEM methodology, see the “WEO Model” section of the World Energy Outlook website:
www.worldenergyoutlook.org.

Chapter 1 | Introduction and scope

37

1



More definition on finding and development costs for different types of conventional
oil and gas, as well as a revised representation of associated gas production.



New play-by-play models for tight oil and shale gas in the United States.



An overhaul of the way that trade in natural gas is represented, incorporating the best
available information on supply contracts and infrastructure plans, disaggregation by
country in North America and more detail on gas imports by the European Union.

The WEM is very data-intensive, containing detailed and up-to-date data on energy
demand, supply and transformation, as well as time series for a range of energy prices and
costs. These data are drawn primarily from IEA databases, which are maintained by the
IEA Energy Data Centre on the basis of submissions from IEA member and non-member
countries, supplemented by additional research and other sources: historical cost data for
wind and solar, for example, are drawn from the International Renewable Energy Agency.
The base year for all of the scenarios is 2014, as comprehensive market data for all countries
were available only up to the end of 2014 at the time the modelling work was completed.
However, where preliminary data for 2015 were available (which was often the case), they
have been incorporated. The outputs from the WEM are coupled with quantitative models
from other organisations to generate additional findings and insights. Such collaboration
in 2016 contributed importantly to two WEO Special Reports: Energy and Air Pollution
(IEA, 2016a) with the International Institute of Applied Systems Analysis; and with the
Organisation of Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) computable general
equilibrium model, ENV-Linkages, on the economic impacts of energy policies for the
Mexico Energy Outlook (IEA, 2016b).

1.2.1 Inputs to the modelling
Energy policies

© OECD/IEA, 2016

The policies that are assumed to be pursued by governments around the world vary by
scenario: indeed, different policy assumptions are instrumental in producing the divergent
outcomes that we see between the Current Policies Scenario, the New Policies Scenario
and the decarbonisation scenarios. A good example of such policy differentiation between
scenarios arises in relation to the Clean Power Plan in the United States, which aims to cut
emissions of carbon dioxide and other pollutants from the US power sector. The Plan was
first proposed by the US Environmental Protection Agency in June 2014 and a final version
followed in August 2015. Once it was announced in 2014, it was incorporated into the
New Policies Scenario. Once the final rules had been put in place, the Plan would normally
have become part of the Current Policies Scenario as well. However, in February 2016, the
US Supreme Court suspended implementation of the Clean Power Plan, pending judicial
review. Even though some US states are moving ahead with implementation, the Clean
Power Plan is therefore currently included only in the New Policies Scenario and not in the
Current Policies Scenario.
The guidance that countries provided on future energy policies in their NDC’s, submitted
to the UNFCCC in the run-up to the Paris COP21, is an important input to the WEO-2016.
The impact of the energy-related component of these climate pledges was analysed in the
38

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

WEO-2015 cycle, notably in Energy and Climate Change: World Energy Outlook Special Report
(IEA, 2015a), published in advance of COP21 and in a WEO Special Briefing for COP21.7 However,
more complete information on all the NDCs, as well as proposed implementing measures, is
now available and has been considered in detail in the preparation of this Outlook. A detailed
list of the policies assumed to be implemented in the various scenarios is included in Annex B.
They include programmes to support renewable energy and improve energy efficiency,
to promote alternative fuels and vehicles, and to change the way that energy is priced, for
example, by reforming subsidised consumer prices for oil, gas and electricity.
On the latter point, during the recent period of lower oil prices many countries have
signalled intent to remove fossil-fuel subsidies. But their removal is not assumed in the
Current Policies Scenario unless a formal programme is already in place. In the New Policies
Scenario, all net-importing countries and regions phase out fossil-fuel subsidies completely
within ten years. In the 450 Scenario, while all subsidies are similarly removed within ten
years in net-importing regions, they are also removed in all net-exporting regions, except
the Middle East, within 20 years.
Another influential policy variation between the scenarios is the scope and level of carbon
pricing, which has a major impact on the relative costs of using different fuels. As of
mid-2016, 63 carbon pricing instruments were in place or scheduled for implementation,
either cap-and-trade schemes or carbon taxes, with wide variations in coverage and
price (Figure 1.1). In addition to schemes already in place, which are assumed to remain
throughout our Outlook period, the New Policies Scenario includes the introduction of new
carbon pricing instruments where these have been announced but not yet introduced. A
notable example is China’s carbon trading scheme, due to come into force by the end of
2017 for six large energy-consuming sectors: power, iron and steel, chemicals, building
materials, paper and nonferrous metals. In the 450 Scenario, the use of carbon pricing
instruments becomes much more widespread, especially within the OECD, and prices are
significantly higher (Table 1.1).
Table 1.1 ⊳ CO2 price assumptions in selected regions by scenario
$2015 per tonne

Current Policies
Scenario

New Policies
Scenario

© OECD/IEA, 2016

450 Scenario

Region
European Union
Korea
European Union
Chile
Korea
China
South Africa
United States, Canada, Japan,
Korea, Australia, New Zealand
European Union
China, Russia, Brazil, South Africa

Sectors
Power, industry, aviation
Power, industry
Power, industry, aviation
Power
Power, industry
Power, industry
Power, industry

2020
18
18
20
6
20
10
7

2030
30
30
37
12
37
23
15

2040
40
40
50
20
50
35
24

Power, industry

20

100

140

Power, industry, aviation
Power, industry

20
10

100
75

140
125

7. www.iea.org/media/news/WEO_INDC_Paper_Final_WEB.PDF.

Chapter 1 | Introduction and scope

39

1

Figure 1.1 ⊳ Selected carbon pricing schemes in place as of mid-2016
Mexico
Estonia
Latvia
China*
European Union
New Zealand
United States (California)
Korea
Slovenia
Ireland
Canada**
France
United Kingdom
Japan***
Norway
Finland****
Switzerland
Sweden

Carbon tax
Emissions trading system

20

40

60

80

100
120
140
Dollars per t CO2-eq

Countries put a wide range of prices on carbon in different parts of the energy sector
Notes: All prices as of 1 July 2016. $/tCO2-eq = US dollars per tonne of carbon-dioxide equivalent. The coverage of the
various schemes varies widely, with many limited to specific sub-sectors and/or fuels. Values for Norway cover lower
and upper values of carbon tax. * China includes pilot schemes introduced in Shanghai, Guangdong and Chongqing
($1-2/tCO2-eq), Hubei and Tianjin ($4/tCO2-eq), Beijing and Shenzhen ($6/tCO2-eq). ** Canada includes initiatives
introduced by Québec ($13/tCO2-eq), Alberta ($15/tCO2-eq) and British Columbia ($23/tCO2-eq). *** Japan includes
national carbon tax ($3/tCO2-eq) and Tokyo emissions trading ($31/tCO2-eq) **** Finland includes initiatives covering
heating fuels ($62/tCO2-eq) and the transport sector ($66/tCO2-eq).
Sources: World Bank Group; Ecofys; Carbon Pricing Watch 2016.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Economic outlook
Economic prospects play a critically important role in determining the outlook for energy
consumption, not only the headline rate of growth in gross domestic product (GDP), but
also the way in which growth rates might vary across different sectors of the economy.
For the world as a whole, GDP growth is pushing energy consumption higher. However,
this relationship has diverged substantially across countries over recent years. Among the
OECD group of economies, growth in GDP (expressed in real purchasing power parity [PPP]
terms) was even associated with a slight decline in primary energy demand for the period
2000-2014. This is a noteworthy turn of events, but not necessarily a surprising one given
that structural economic shifts, saturation effects and efficiency gains produced a peak
in primary energy demand in Japan (in 2004) and the European Union (in 2006), since
when demand in both has fallen by more than 10%; and demand in the United States is
already 5% below the high point reached in 2007. Elsewhere, however, the links between
40

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

economic growth and energy consumption remain strong (Figure 1.2). Overall, for every
one percentage point rise in non-OECD economic growth over the period 2000-2014,
energy demand increased by around 0.7%.
Figure 1.2 ⊳ Changes in GDP and energy demand in selected countries and
regions, 2000-2014

China
Middle East
India
Southeast Asia

Energy
demand

Africa

GDP

Latin America
Russia
United States
European Union
-50%

0%

50%

100%

150%

200%

250%

300%

Comparing the pace of economic growth from 2000 to 2014 with energy
demand growth over the same period shows wide country and regional variations
Note: GDP = gross domestic product.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

In each of the scenarios included in this Outlook, the world economy is assumed to grow
at a compound average annual rate of 3.4% over the period 2014 to 2040 (Table 1.2).
This represents a slight reduction in anticipated growth compared with the 3.5% rate
assumed in WEO-2015. The main differences occur over the period to 2020, where the
new growth assumptions reflect the more subdued economic forecasts made by the
International Monetary Fund (IMF), the primary source for our medium-term GDP
outlook.8 The downward revisions over this period have been sharpest for hydrocarbon
exporters, particularly those in Latin America and Africa, where deteriorating fiscal and
external balances have forced cuts to consumption and investment spending. Even for net
hydrocarbon importers, the period of lower oil prices has proved to be less of an economic
boost than many had expected. In many cases, the drop in fuel prices seen by consumers
has been much less than the headline fall in the oil price: many countries have taken the
opportunity of lower prices to cut domestic energy subsidies or raise fuel taxes. Exchange
rate fluctuations and the strong US dollar have also had an impact (Box 1.2).
The way that future growth in economic activity translates into demand for energy is
heavily dependent on policies (notably energy efficiency policies, the intensity of which
8. The medium-term outlook for GDP was adjusted slightly, in consultation with the IMF, to align with IEA expectations
about energy market conditions.

Chapter 1 | Introduction and scope

41

1

varies by scenario) and structural changes in the economies.9 Future GDP growth based on
an expansion of industrial output, especially in energy-intensive sectors, such as iron and
steel, cement or petrochemicals, has much stronger implications for energy demand than a
similar expansion based on the services sector. For the global economy as a whole, services
account for the largest share of current GDP, at 62%, and this share rises steadily to reach
64% by 2040. The rising role of the services sector in GDP is particularly striking in the case
of China, whose economy is already rebalancing away from a reliance on manufacturing
and exports towards a more domestic- and service-oriented economy, with a much less
energy-intensive pattern of growth than in the past. The share of industry in China’s GDP is
projected to fall from 42% today to 34% in 2040.
Table 1.2 ⊳ Real GDP growth assumptions by region

Note: Calculated based on GDP expressed in year-2015 dollars in PPP terms.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Sources: IMF (2016); World Bank databases; IEA databases and analysis.

9. The shift in energy use in some developing countries away from the traditional use of solid biomass (particularly for
cooking) towards modern fuels also has a large impact on measured energy use, as well as significant co-benefits in
reducing exposure to air pollution.
42

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

Box 1.2 ⊳ Impact of exchange rate fluctuations

1

All energy prices, investments and other costs are expressed in constant US dollars
in our scenarios. This is an appropriate simplification for a modelling effort aimed at
understanding the long-term dynamics of the energy sector and that seeks equilibrium
only in this sector, rather than across entire economies. But, particularly in the short
term, fluctuations in exchange rates can have important implications for energy trends,
notably if the dollar – the currency in which much internationally traded energy is
priced – gains or loses value against other currencies.
The steady strengthening of the dollar since mid-2014 is a good case in point
(Figure 1.3). For economies whose currencies lost value against the dollar at a time
when prices for oil, gas and coal were falling, the fall in prices for consumers was
partly offset. Similarly, producers were shielded from some of the revenue loss. An oil
price fall in US dollars of 50% can result in a price change of barely 25% in countries
where currencies have suffered a fall against the dollar. It is not just energy prices
that are affected, but also energy technologies. For countries looking to import solar
photovoltaic (PV), for example, the striking decline in panel costs (expressed in US
dollars) is much less impressive in local currencies that have lost value against the
dollar. In Australia, for example, the costs of residential PV fell by half between 2012
and 2015, when expressed in US dollars, but in local currency terms – a much more
relevant indicator for consumer uptake – they dropped by only a little more than a
quarter. The energy implications for any individual country depend on the way that
it sources energy products, services and technologies, whether locally or from the
international market. We have taken this into account in WEO-2016 when establishing
the base year technology costs in markets that have seen large, recent currency swings.

Index (1 July 2014 = 100)

Figure 1.3 ⊳ Trends in oil and coal prices and US dollar value
160
140

US dollar

120
100
80

Coal price

60
40

Oil price

20

© OECD/IEA, 2016

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

A rise in the value of the US dollar has affected the way that falling
fossil-fuel prices affect consumers in many countries
Note: The US dollar index is a measure of the value of the dollar against a basket of non-US currencies.

Chapter 1 | Introduction and scope

43

Demographic trends
Population and demographics are important underlying determinants of energy use. As
in previous years, the WEO-2016 adopts the medium variant of the latest United Nations’
projections as the basis for population growth in all scenarios (UNPD, 2015). According
to these projections, the world population is expected to grow by 0.9% per year on
average, from 7.3 billion in 2014 to 9.2 billion in 2040 (Table 1.3). The increase in the
global population is concentrated in Africa, India, Southeast Asia and the Middle East.
Africa experiences the fastest rate of growth, its population nearly doubling to 2.1 billion
people. India overtakes China to become the world’s most populous country in the early
2020s, with its population exceeding 1.6 billion by the end of the period. A number of
countries experience a decline in population over the period to 2040, including Japan
(whose population in 2040 is projected to be almost 10% smaller than it is today), Russia
and Germany. People increasingly concentrate in cities and towns, pushing the global
urbanisation rate up from 53% in 2014 to 63% in 2040.
Table 1.3 ⊳ Population assumptions by region
Population growth*

2000-14

Urbanisation

2014-25

2014-40

2014

2040

2014

2040

OECD

0.7%

0.5%

0.4%

1 272

1 394

80%

85%

Americas

1.0%

0.8%

0.7%

496

592

81%

86%

0.9%

0.7%

0.6%

323

377

82%

86%

Europe

0.6%

0.3%

0.2%

570

599

76%

82%

Asia Oceania

United States

0.3%

0.1%

0.0%

206

203

90%

93%

Japan

0.0%

-0.3%

-0.4%

127

114

93%

97%

Non-OECD

1.4%

1.2%

1.0%

5 983

7 758

48%

59%

E. Europe/Eurasia

0.0%

0.1%

-0.1%

343

335

63%

68%

-0.1%

-0.1%

-0.3%

144

133

74%

79%

Russia
Asia

1.1%

0.8%

0.6%

3 779

4 459

43%

57%

China

0.6%

0.3%

0.1%

1 372

1 398

55%

73%

India

1.5%

1.1%

0.9%

1 295

1 634

32%

45%

Southeast Asia

1.3%

1.0%

0.8%

623

763

47%

60%

Middle East

2.4%

1.7%

1.4%

224

323

70%

75%

Africa

2.5%

2.4%

2.3%

1 156

2 062

40%

51%

1.5%

0.7%

0.6%

54

63

64%

75%

1.2%

0.9%

0.7%

481

578

79%

85%

1.1%

0.7%

0.5%

206

236

85%

90%

World

1.2%

1.0%

0.9%

7 255

9 152

53%

63%

European Union

0.3%

0.1%

0.0%

510

511

75%

81%

South Africa
Latin America
Brazil

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Population
(million)

* Compound average annual growth rate.
Sources: UN Population Division databases; IEA analysis.
44

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

1.2.2 International prices and technology costs
The variables discussed so far – assumptions on future energy policies, economic activity
and demographic trends – are all introduced from outside the model (they are exogenous
variables). Another set of variables, of considerable importance to the operation of the
World Energy Model, is generated within the model itself. These are our price trajectories
for each of the fossil fuels and the evolution of costs for different energy technologies.
In the case of fossil-fuel prices, the need is to reach a level which brings the long-term
projections for supply and demand into balance, and price trajectories are adjusted in
iterative model runs until they satisfy this criterion (Table 1.4). The price trajectories are
smooth trend lines, and do not attempt to anticipate the cycles and short-term fluctuations
that characterise all commodity markets in practice.
Table 1.4 ⊳ Fossil-fuel import prices by scenario
New Policies
Scenario

Real terms ($2015)

Current Policies
Scenario

450 Scenario

2015

2020

2030

2040

2020

2030

2040

2020

2030

2040

51

79

111

124

82

127

146

73

85

78

United States

2.6

4.1

5.4

6.9

4.3

5.9

7.9

3.9

4.8

5.4

European Union

7.0

7.1

10.3

11.5

7.3

11.1

13.0

6.9

9.4

9.9

China

9.7

9.2

11.6

12.1

9.5

12.5

13.9

8.6

10.4

10.5

Japan

10.3

9.6

11.9

12.4

9.9

13.0

14.4

9.0

10.8

10.9

OECD average

64

72

83

87

74

91

100

66

64

57

United States

51

55

58

60

56

61

64

53

52

49

European Union

57

63

74

77

65

80

88

58

57

51

Coastal China

72

78

86

89

79

92

98

73

72

67

Japan

59

66

77

80

68

84

92

61

59

53

IEA crude oil ($/barrel)
Natural gas ($/MBtu)

Steam coal ($/tonne)

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Notes: MBtu = million British thermal units. Gas prices are weighted averages expressed on a gross calorific-value basis.
All prices are for bulk supplies exclusive of tax. The US price reflects the wholesale price prevailing on the domestic
market. The China and European Union gas import prices reflect a balance of LNG and pipeline imports, while the Japan
import price is solely LNG.

In the case of technology costs, the WEM incorporates a process of learning that brings
down costs with the cumulative deployment of a given technology: the more a given
technology is used, the quicker costs come down – so again it varies by scenario. Learning
applies, in different ways, to all technologies across the entire energy system – from
upstream oil and gas to renewables and energy efficiency, but the downward pressure on
costs of greater scale of deployment is offset, in some cases, by other considerations, such
as the effects of depleting a finite resource (most obviously, in the case of oil and gas) or
other limits (such as the availability of prime onshore sites for wind power).
Chapter 1 | Introduction and scope

45

1

Oil
Moving into the last quarter of 2016, there are signs that the market rebalancing anticipated
in last year’s WEO (and in the IEA’s short- and medium-term analysis) is underway; but the
process is a slow one. With Saudi Arabia and other key Organization of Petroleum Exporting
Countries (OPEC) producers raising output in 2016 to historic highs, the adjustment in the
market has depended on the interaction between two other variables: the stimulus that
a lower price gives to oil demand and the check that it provides on supply from more
expensive sources, much of which is non-OPEC. Oil demand growth has indeed been
relatively strong, and is anticipated to reach 1.2 million barrels per day (mb/d) for 2016 as
a whole. Investment cuts are also starting to take their toll on non-OPEC output, which is
expected to decline by around 0.9 mb/d in 2016. But output from the main low-cost Middle
East producers has been rising steadily and – with no clear global surplus of demand over
supply – global inventories remain at record levels.
As argued in last year’s Outlook, the process of market rebalancing is rarely a smooth
one and the oil market could well enter a new period of price volatility as it seeks a new
equilibrium. A key consideration is the long lead times associated with most upstream
projects, which mean that – in the majority of cases – the large cuts in upstream spending
seen in many non-OPEC countries have yet to work their way through into lower supply.
WEO-2016 does not attempt to model short-run price fluctuations, but indicates that, in
the New Policies Scenario, a price of around $80/barrel would be sufficient and necessary
to balance the market in 2020.
The possibility that the oil market could settle at a lower price level cannot be ruled out:
indeed, the market expectations expressed in the forward curve for Brent crude oil (as of
October 2016) suggest prices around $60/barrel in 2020. Arguments in favour of such a
price level as the “new normal” rest on the perception of a strong structural component
in the recent decline in upstream costs, particularly in the case of US tight oil, implying
resilience among key non-OPEC sources to a lower price environment. In addition, such
arguments rely on the assumption that the main resource-holders, led by Saudi Arabia, are
less able (or less willing) to exert meaningful influence on the market by restraining output
than they have been in the past. A scenario in which ample supply keeps oil prices in the
$50-60/barrel range until the early 2020s, before rising very gradually to $85/barrel in
2040, was examined in WEO-2015 (Box 1.3) and the results of that Low Oil Price Scenario
remain a point of reference and comparison in this Outlook.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Box 1.3 ⊳ Are we in a Low Oil Price Scenario?

With the oil price only rarely breaking above $50/barrel in the first three-quarters of
2016, the idea that oil prices could stay “lower for longer” has gained a firm foothold
in discussions on the oil market outlook. But how much longer could a period of lower
prices plausibly last? In WEO-2015, we tested the long-term durability of this idea in
a Low Oil Price Scenario, in which we examined a set of conditions that would allow
lower oil prices to persist all the way through to 2040.

46

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

The main assumptions that differentiated this scenario from the New Policies Scenario
were lower near-term economic growth and a more rapid phase out of fossil-fuel
consumption subsidies (both restraining growth in oil consumption); greater resilience
among some non-OPEC sources of supply to a lower price environment, notably tight
oil in the United States; a lasting commitment by OPEC countries to give priority to
market share and to a price that limits substitution away from oil; and favourable
assumptions about the ability of the main oil-producing regions to weather the storm
of lower hydrocarbon revenues.
One year on, some of these assumptions are holding. Economic prospects have indeed
dimmed and many countries – including not just oil importers but also oil exporters –
have announced their intention to reform energy prices, dampening prospects for
strong demand growth. Production in some key non-OPEC countries, notably the
United States and Russia, has held up well under testing conditions, although the shift
towards greater reliance on lower cost producers in the Middle East, another feature
of the Low Oil Price Scenario, is already visible, with the share of the Middle East in
global output rising to 35%, a level not seen since the late 1970s.
However, other assumptions are looking shakier. Some other anticipated sources of
future non-OPEC supply are showing the strain. In Brazil, Petrobras’ annual investment
plans have been slashed, as lower revenues, high debt and the repercussions of a
corruption scandal take their toll on spending. In Canada, drilling activity in 2016 is set
to be lower than at any point in the country’s 40-year recorded drilling activity history.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Moreover, after a long period in which consensus proved difficult to reach, OPEC
countries announced a plan to return to active market management at a meeting
in Algiers in September 2016, agreeing to cap crude oil output at a level between
32.5 mb/d and 33 mb/d (the group’s first deal to cut production since 2008). The details
of the agreement and the potential effect on market balances remain to be seen, but
the announcement was indicative of the testing conditions that lower oil prices have
created for many OPEC producers, especially those that faced the downturn with
limited accumulated financial reserves. The budgetary cuts necessary to adjust to the
reduced levels of revenue have been deeply destabilising in countries like Venezuela,
Iraq, Nigeria and Libya, especially when considered alongside existing political and
security challenges.
In practice, this tallies with a finding of WEO-2015: the Low Oil Price Scenario offers
the potential for lower cost producers to expand their output (because of the stimulus
to demand and because higher cost producers are squeezed out of the supply mix);
but they also stand to lose more from the lower price than they gain from higher
production. The pressure that a lower price trajectory puts on the fiscal balances of
these key producers ultimately makes such a scenario look increasingly unlikely, the
further it is extended out into the future.

Chapter 1 | Introduction and scope

47

1

In the New Policies Scenario, the oil price trend continues to edge gradually higher post2020, with three main considerations underpinning this rise (Figure 1.4). The first relates
to the amount of new production that is required to keep pace with demand. This might
appear modest at first glance, since oil use rises only by 13 mb/d over a 25-year period;
but most of the investment required in all scenarios is to replace declining production
from existing fields (a point discussed in Chapter 3). Second, in almost all cases, oil is more
costly to produce in 2040 than today. There have been strong cost reductions in many
upstream activities in recent years, but, in our estimation, there is a cyclical component
to these reductions that is set to reverse as upstream activity picks up and the supply
and services markets tighten (see Chapter 3). We incorporate continued improvements
in technology and efficiency into our Outlook, but their impact on upstream costs is more
than counterbalanced, for most resource types, by the effects of depletion: as “easy oil”
is depleted, so producers are forced to move to more challenging and complex reservoirs,
that are more expensive to develop. This is the case also for tight oil in the United States,
as operators eventually deplete the main “sweet spots”, the most productive areas in the
various plays, and are forced to move into areas of lower resource quality.
As well, logistical and other constraints on the rate at which oil can be developed (in both
OPEC and non-OPEC countries) can easily keep the oil price trajectory above the marginal
cost of the barrel required to meet demand. These include geopolitical risks, that might
constrain investment and output of the world’s lowest cost oil, and our assumption that
the main low-cost resource-holders in OPEC follow through with efforts (following the
recent meeting in Algiers) to defend a global price level above that implied by the global
supply-cost curve.

Dollars per barrel (2015)

Figure 1.4 ⊳ Average IEA crude oil import price by scenario
160

Current Policies Scenario
New Policies Scenario

120

80

450 Scenario

40

2000

2010

2020

2030

2040

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Oil prices vary widely by scenario, depending on the level of demand

48

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

Oil prices in the other main scenarios are similarly determined by the need for investment
to meet projected demand. Higher demand in the Current Policies Scenario means a higher
call on oil from costly fields in non-OPEC countries. Conversely, in the 450 Scenario, more
aggressive policy action to curb demand means that a market equilibrium can be found at
a lower price.

Natural gas
There is, for the moment, no single global price for natural gas. Instead, a set of regionally
determined prices, loosely connected, reflect the distinct market dynamics and pricing
mechanisms of different regional markets (Figure 1.5). In this Outlook, we focus on three
regional prices: North America, Asia and Europe. In North America, the reference price is
that of Henry Hub, a distribution hub in the US pipeline system in Louisiana where the price
is set entirely by gas-to-gas competition, i.e. it is a price that balances regional supply and
demand (including demand for gas for export). The price of gas paid by North American
consumers is calculated on the basis of a series of differentials from Henry Hub, reflecting
the costs of transmission and distribution, and other fees and charges. The price of gas
exported from North America as liquefied natural gas (LNG) reflects the additional costs of
liquefaction, shipping in LNG tankers and regasification at the importing terminal.

Dollars per MBtu (2015)

Figure 1.5 ⊳ Natural gas prices by region in the New Policies Scenario
18

projected

historical
15

Japan
European
Union

12
9

United States

6
3

2000

2010

2020

2030

2040

Natural gas prices in the main regions are connected
by an increasingly flexible global trade in LNG

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Notes: US price is a wholesale price; other prices are average import prices.

Projected Henry Hub prices vary by scenario (Table 1.4). As of September 2016, Henry Hub
prices are around $3/MBtu; our view is that this price will need to rise, in all scenarios, in
order to balance the market – although the extent of this increase is highly contingent on the
trajectory for composite demand (local and for export) and also on the size of US shale gas
resources (as discussed in the sensitivity analysis in Chapter 4). Perhaps counter-intuitively,
Chapter 1 | Introduction and scope

49

1

our US gas price trajectory in the New Policies Scenario remains relatively low over the
medium-term as a result of the anticipated rebound in the global oil price: by increasing the
value of the liquids produced along with the gas, and by encouraging tight oil production
and its associated gas volumes, gas output remains buoyant at prices around $4/MBtu
until well into the 2020s. However, looking further ahead, the need for the United States
and Canada to produce more than 1 trillion cubic metres (tcm) of gas each year starts
to tell. The twin cost pressures of relying more on dry gas production and depleting the
most productive areas of the various shale gas plays has the effect of pushing the price
gradually higher and by 2040 it is closing in on $7/MBtu. A similar narrative on the supply
side, but accompanied by significantly different prospects for demand, explains the higher
price trajectory in the Current Policies Scenario and, conversely, the lower path in the
450 Scenario.
The other regional gas price markers that are pivotal to the Outlook are the European
and Asian import prices. The prices in Table 1.4 are the average prices paid in each case
by importers: they reflect the different pricing arrangements prevailing in the various
markets. In the case of Europe, this currently means an increasing share of imported gas
priced off trading hubs, particularly in north-western Europe, but with a sizeable residual
volume with prices indexed in full or in part to oil product prices (concentrated in southern
and south-eastern Europe). In Asia, oil-indexation remains the norm for most imported
gas, but new contracts in many parts of the region are weakening this linkage by including
references to other indices (such as the US Henry Hub). Throughout the world, the trend is
towards greater flexibility of contract terms, shorter contract duration and a greater share
of gas available on a spot basis. However, there are still multiple contractual, regulatory
and infrastructure barriers that prevent the gas market from operating like a standard
commodity market.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

A key strategic question for gas markets is the speed at which a truly global gas market
might emerge, in which internationally traded gas is no longer tied to specific consumers
or defined geographical areas but is free to move in response to price signals that are
determined by the dynamics of gas-to-gas competition. This is indeed the direction in
which gas markets are assumed to move, such that, by the latter part of the projection
period, the price differentials between the various regional markets in WEO-2016 settle
into a range that essentially reflects the costs of moving gas between them.
The current period of over supply in gas markets, alongside the low level of oil prices, has
brought down prices in all the major markets. In the New Policies Scenario (as examined
in more detail in Chapter 4), the global LNG market does not rebalance until the mid2020s, a consideration that curbs profitable export opportunities in the meantime. But
the increased competition, combined with the arrival of the United States as a major LNG
exporter, creates a propitious backdrop for movement towards more flexible pricing and
trading arrangements. Large US resources and production flexibility, combined with an LNG
export industry actively seeking arbitrage opportunities, means that Henry Hub is projected
to become not only a regional but also a global reference point, shaping investment and
50

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

marketing strategies in other exporting countries and regions. As a result, over the longer
term, the European import price settles at around $4-5/MBtu above the US price (in all
scenarios), a differential that reflects the cost of delivering gas to exporting terminals, its
liquefaction, shipping and then regasification in the importing country. The Asian import
price rises more quickly, due to the continued importance of oil-linked pricing in this region,
but as this link weakens the “Asian premium” disappears and the differentials from the US
price fall to around $5-6/MBtu (the additional sum, compared with Europe, reflecting the
extra shipping distance to Asian markets).10

Coal
The global coal market consists of various regional sub-markets that interact with each
other through imports, exports and arbitrage opportunities. Although less than one-fifth
of the global coal production is traded between countries, the international coal market
plays a pivotal role in connecting the different sub-markets and in determining overall price
trends. Coal prices vary significantly between the regional markets – the differences are
primarily due to transportation cost, infrastructure constraints and coal quality – but they
typically move in lockstep with international coal prices.
All major coal prices had been in steep decline for four consecutive years before bottoming
out in early 2016 (Figure 1.6). The average price of imported steam coal in Europe fell to
$57/tonne in Europe and $59/tonne in Japan in 2015. Such price levels were last seen in
the early 2000s, just before the big price hike started in the mid-2000s. While much of the
price increase between 2007 and 2011 had to do with strong global coal demand growth,
China’s emergence as a major importer, supply capacity shortages, overheated supply
chains and the relative weakness of the US dollar; much of the price decline over the last
four years has to do with a reversal of these fundamentals. Global coal demand growth has
stalled, Chinese imports are declining, supply capacity is amply available, the US dollar has
appreciated against all major currencies and supply chains (shipping and infrastructure but
also machinery and consumables supply) have slackened.
It is not unusual for coal markets to follow business cycles, but the key question for this
Outlook is whether the coal market will find a way out of the current downturn and achieve
an economically viable price trajectory. Our coal price trajectories rest on four pillars:

© OECD/IEA, 2016



Policies and market forces underpin the closure of mines that are unable to recoup
their costs, which leads to a reduction of excess capacity and supports a balancing of
supply and demand by the early 2020s, with the profitability of the industry by-andlarge restored.

10. Moving LNG between markets is expected to become slightly less expensive over the period to 2040, as a result of
efficiency and technology improvements that bring down liquefaction costs (and, to a more limited extent, shipping and
regasification costs). See Chapter 5 in WEO-2015 (IEA, 2015b).

Chapter 1 | Introduction and scope

51

1



Global coal demand growth of 0.2% per year, in combination with gradual depletion of
existing mines, partially absorbs overcapacity and requires investments in coal supply
of $45 billion per year over the Outlook period in the New Policies Scenario.



Geological conditions are worsening, new mines are deeper or further away from
markets and coal quality is deteriorating; all of these factors put modest upward
pressure on costs that cannot be fully offset by productivity gains.



Current exchange rates remain unchanged, while cyclically low input prices for steel,
tyres and fuel trend upwards in the long term.

Spurred by the implementation of a first set of capacity cuts in China, coal prices started
rising in the second-quarter of 2016. The New Policies Scenario sees this process continuing
slowly, with European and Japanese import prices reaching $70/tonne and $73/tonne
respectively in 2025 and thereafter increasing gradually to $77/tonne and $80/tonne in
2040. China’s coast line provides the link between the international market and the vast
Chinese domestic coal market and remains of the utmost importance for international coal
pricing, although a similar arbitrage point is projected to arise on India’s west coast (see
India Energy Outlook 2015: World Energy Outlook Special Report). Chinese coastal steam
coal prices increase to almost $90/tonne in 2040 (assuming no change in taxation). Over
the long term, average prices in the United States increase at a more moderate rate than
international coal prices. This comes as production gradually shifts to the west, where
prices are lower. Both the Powder River Basin and the Illinois Basin capture market share at
the expense of the Appalachian basins, albeit in a rapidly declining market.

Dollars per tonne
(2015, adjusted to 6 000 kcal/kg)

Figure 1.6 ⊳ Steam coal prices by region in the New Policies Scenario
200

historical

projected

150

100

Coastal China
Europe
United States

50

2000

2010

2020

2030

2040

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Steam coal prices recover from current lows but the
long-term trend remains markedly below previous highs
Notes: kcal/kg = kilocalorie per kilogramme. Coastal China represents imports and domestic sales (including domestic
taxes). The European price is for imports. The US price is an average delivered price (primarily composed of mine-mouth
prices in the sub-markets of the Powder River Basin, Illinois Basin, Northern Appalachia, Central Appalachia etc., plus
transport and handling cost).
52

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

Technology innovation and costs
Many parts of the global economy have seen rapid, sometimes transformational
technology change in recent years, most clearly in areas such as information technologies
and communications. The energy sector is not yet one of these areas. The share of fossil
fuels in primary energy demand remains almost exactly where it was 25 years ago, with
the fastest growth among the fossil fuels over the last quarter-century registered by coal.
Centralised power systems reliant on fossil fuels remain by far the dominant model in
the electricity sector. Liquid petroleum-based fuels, feeding internal combustion engines,
account for well over 90% of transport energy demand.
Yet efforts to overturn this apparently stable picture are gathering momentum and some
contours of an alternative vision for the energy sector are taking shape: the rise of highefficiency, variable renewable energy technologies led by wind and solar; a greatly reduced
role for fuel combustion (with the possible exception of bioenergy), allied with control
technologies to capture pollutants and greenhouse gases before they are released to
the atmosphere; a major increase in the role of electricity across all the end-use sectors,
combined with a surge in distributed generation and storage technologies that alter the
traditional model of power delivery. All this would be tied together through efficient,
integrated system management via smart metering and grids.

2008 = 100%

Figure 1.7 ⊳ Recent cost trends for selected technologies
120%
100%
80%

Upstream oil and gas
Onshore wind

60%
40%
Grid-scale batteries
20%

Solar PV – utility scale
Light emitting diodes (LEDs)

2008

2010

2012

2014

2016

Cost deflation has affected diverse technologies across the energy spectrum

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Source: IEA World Energy Investment 2016 (IEA, 2016c).

There are different views on whether and how quickly such a transformation might take
place. Costs for many of the emerging energy supply technologies have fallen rapidly in
recent years (as have costs for upstream oil and gas since 2014) (Figure 1.7). Yet they still
remain, in most cases, above those of the competing conventional technologies, and so
require some measure of government support to gain market share. In addition, major
Chapter 1 | Introduction and scope

53

1

parts of the world’s existing capital stock (today’s power plants, buildings, factories,
vehicles and energy supply infrastructure) have long lifetimes, typically being renewed
or replaced only slowly. This creates substantial inertia in the system, even if the rate of
change can be accelerated by policies that encourage building retrofits, efficiency upgrades
or early retirement of some assets.
The projections in this Outlook are very sensitive to the way that technological changes
affect the cost of different fuels and technologies, including the cost of investing in energy
efficiency. The process of learning and cost reduction is fully incorporated into the WEM,
both on the demand and supply sides, and applies not only to technologies in use today,
but also to those approaching commercialisation. The extent of learning and cost reduction
is linked to the level at which a given technology is deployed, which affects not just the
costs of the technology itself, e.g. the batteries for electric vehicles or panels for solar
PV, but also related costs for design, installation, inspection and maintenance. As a result,
cost reductions for key renewable energy technologies are significantly greater in the
450 Scenario than in the New Policies Scenario.
Although technology learning is an integral part of the WEO approach, the Outlook
does not attempt to predict technology breakthroughs, i.e. an advance that produces
a step-change in technologies and costs. These are inherently unpredictable. Typically,
they also take many years to proceed from the research laboratory to large-scale
commercialisation. They cannot, of course, be ruled out for the period to 2040 and it is at
least arguable that the pace of technological change and clean energy innovation will rise
in the coming years. That is the express objective of a growing number of international
initiatives, including Mission Innovation and the Breakthrough Energy Coalition (both
launched at the Paris climate conference in 2015), as well as of established bodies, like
the Clean Energy Ministerial.11 The 20 countries, plus the European Union, participating
in Mission Innovation are committed to double investment in clean energy research and
development over the five years to 2021. The link to private sector investment in new
energy technologies comes via the Breakthrough Energy Coalition, a group of private
companies. Their success or failure can only be seen as a risk factor qualifying the
numbers produced by our scenarios.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Electricity generation and storage is a focus for much of the work on technology innovation
and improvement. On the generation side, the costs of solar PV and onshore wind have
fallen dramatically in recent years: from 2010 to 2015, indicative global average onshore
wind generation costs for new plants fell by an estimated 20% on average, while costs for

11. The Clean Energy Ministerial (CEM) is a high-level global forum to promote policies and programmes that advance
clean energy technology, bringing together 24 countries and the European Commission that are estimated to represent
around 75% of global greenhouse-gas emissions and 90% of global clean energy investment. Following a selection
process in 2016, the secretariat supporting the work of the CEM will be housed at the IEA. The IEA also has close working
ties with Mission Innovation, the Breakthrough Energy Coalition and other energy technology initiatives, as well as its
own network of Technology Collaboration Programmes (www.iea.org/tcp/).
54

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

new utility-scale solar PV declined by two-thirds and further cost reductions are anticipated,
albeit at a slower pace, in our projections for solar PV. Onshore wind projects also benefit
from lower costs, although the effect of technology learning is offset, in some countries, by
the need to move to less favourable sites for wind generation, as the most favourable sites
are fully developed. Chapter 11 reviews in detail the impact of envisaged cost reductions
on the competitiveness of various renewable energy technologies.
Storage technologies are expected to play a growing role in improving the flexibility of power
systems and in the market penetration of electric vehicles, heating and cooling systems,
and small- or medium-size off-grid installations. Although pumped storage hydropower
continues to dominate the provision of large-scale energy storage, developments in battery
storage have won the headlines, as costs have come down, performance has improved
and new models of electric vehicles and residential-scale power storage have entered the
market. The role of electricity storage in integrating large shares of renewable energy,
alongside other sources of power system flexibility, is considered in detail in Chapter 12.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Some technologies and investment projects are not (yet) experiencing cost declines and
could see lower deployment as a result. Policy and financial support for CCS in recent years
has been lower than anticipated, meaning that deployment has also stalled: only one new
CCS project came on line in 2015, at a Canadian oil upgrader. Such technologies risk falling
further behind. The uptake of CCS in both the New Policies Scenario and the 450 Scenario
has been revised downward in WEO-2016 compared with last year’s Outlook.

Chapter 1 | Introduction and scope

55

1

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Chapter 2
Overview
Take-aways from the WEO-2016

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Highlights

•

Consumption of all modern fuels continues to grow in the period to 2040 in the New
Policies Scenario, although growth in coal is cut to 0.2% per year on average. Oil
demand rises steadily to 103.5 mb/d in 2040; gas consumption rises by nearly 50%,
overtaking coal. But renewable energy is the major growth story of the Outlook: in
the power sector, 60% of all capacity additions to 2040 are from renewables.

•

The relationship between global economic growth, energy demand and related
CO2 emissions is steadily weakening. The climate pledges made at COP21 lock in a
continuation of this trend, but do not yet deliver the early peak in emissions that
would be needed for a 2 °C emissions trajectory.

•

An early peak and then a fall in emissions consistent with the 450 Scenario would
require a step-change in the decarbonisation of the power sector, including
measures to integrate variable renewables, and profound changes to the efficiency
and carbon intensity of end-uses. The overall energy sector carbon budget for
even more ambitious “well below 2 °C” or “1.5 °C” pathways would likely require
emissions to fall to zero sometime between 2040 and 2060, even with carbon
removal technologies.

•

Subsidies to renewables were almost $150 billion in 2015, mostly in the power sector,
but cost reductions mean ever greater deployment per dollar spent. By the 2030s,
renewables subsidies are projected to be in decline, from a peak of $240 billion,
and most renewables generation is competitive without subsidies by 2040. Today’s
lower fossil-fuel prices have given additional impetus to pricing reforms in some
countries and fossil-fuel consumption subsidies fell to $325 billion in 2015.

•

In various parts of the energy system, there are questions whether policies, price
signals or market designs are adequate to ensure investment is made when and
where it is needed. In the case of oil, an increase in new upstream project approvals,
compared with the very low levels seen in 2015 (and so far in 2016) is needed. Oil
remains pivotal for energy security, but natural gas and electricity security are also
being pushed to the fore by changes in global energy use, alongside issues such as
the linkages between energy and water use.

•

Acute deprivation persists in the global energy sector, with 1.2 billion people without
electricity and 2.7 billion reliant on the traditional use of solid biomass for cooking.
Achieving universal access to affordable, reliable and modern energy services by
2030 is now one of the UN Sustainable Development Goals, but our projections
show today’s efforts falling short of reaching this goal.

Chapter 2 | Overview

57

Ten questions on the future of energy
There are many questions that could be asked about the future of energy. The intention
of this chapter is to focus on a few of these, drawing on the analysis in this World Energy
Outlook (WEO) and other reports in the WEO-2016 series. No single vision of the future
should be exclusively relied upon, so the responses often refer to multiple scenarios and
outcomes. Taken together, they provide a coherent framework for assessing the impact of
different policy and investment choices on future energy trends and risks and, in this way,
they can help to inform the energy decisions that need to be taken today. The ten questions
addressed here are:


Has the world broken the link between rising economic activity, energy demand and
energy-related CO2 emissions?



Which fuels and technologies are poised to do well in the post-Paris Agreement energy
order?



Are there limits to growth for renewable energy?



Staying below the 2 degrees Celsius climate change limit: what would be required?



What can the energy sector do to reduce air pollution?



Energy investment – is capital heading where it is needed?



How might the main risks to energy security evolve over the coming decades?



Are we on the path to achieving universal access to energy?



Changing places: is global spending on energy subsidies shifting away from fossil fuels
and in favour of renewable energy?



Does energy reform point a new way forward for Mexico?

2.1

Has the world broken the link between rising economic activity,
energy demand and energy-related CO2 emissions?
Recent data show a significant slowdown in the growth of energy-related
carbon-dioxide (CO2) emissions in 2014 and 2015, and the projections in the
New Policies Scenario suggest that implementation of Nationally Determined
Contributions (NDCs) would lock in this trend. In the New Policies Scenario to
2040, on an average annual basis, CO2 emissions grow at 0.5% per year, while
energy demand grows at 1% and the global economy expands at an average
rate of 3.4%. But the peak in emissions needed to limit the temperature rise to

© OECD/IEA, 2016

below 2 degrees Celsius (°C) is not in sight in this scenario.

IEA data suggest that what has been a fairly inexorable rise in global energy-related
CO2 emissions slowed sharply in 2015, for the second year in a row. Before 2015, there
have been only four periods in the past 40 years in which emissions stood still or fell
compared with the previous year: three of those – the early 1980s, 1992 and 2009 – were
58

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

associated with global economic weakness. In contrast, the most recent stall in emissions
growth comes during a period of economic expansion. This represents a clear hint that
the previously close relationship between global economic growth, energy demand and
related CO2 emissions is weakening. But is it too soon to conclude that the link is broken?
Energy intensity is a measure of the link between global economic activity and energy
demand; preliminary estimates suggest that global energy intensity decreased by 1.8% in
2015, almost twice the average level of improvement over the last decade. Part of the
reduction in energy intensity was due to changes in the global economy: for example,
production of steel and cement fell by 2-3% in 2015, mainly because of developments
in China. The increasing rigour of global energy efficiency policies also played a role. In
turn, the link between energy demand and energy-related CO2 emissions is determined
by the mix of fuels and technologies used to meet the world’s energy needs. Moving away
from the most carbon-intensive fuels (for the first time, the United States generated as
much power from natural gas as from coal in 2015) or introducing more renewables into
the system (additional power generated from renewables was equal to more than 90% of
the growth in global electricity generation in 2015) are the main ways to drive a wedge
between energy and emissions trends. Overall, we estimate that around two-thirds of
the contribution to the flattening in emissions in 2014 and 2015 came from reductions in
energy intensity; the rest from an expansion of cleaner energy sources in global energy use.
The WEO projections offer an opportunity to trace trajectories for gross domestic product
(GDP), energy demand and energy-related CO2 emissions beyond 2015 and see how
they respond to the application of different assumptions about future policies. The GDP
trajectory (which is common to all three WEO scenarios1), anticipates annual average
growth in the global economy of 3.4% for the period to 2040, meaning that the economy
as a whole is well over twice as large in 2040 than today. But the energy required – and the
emissions associated with this energy use – vary substantially across the three scenarios.
Primary energy demand increases by 43% between now and 2040 in the Current Policies
Scenario, by 31% in the New Policies Scenario and by a mere 9% in the 450 Scenario. The
CO2 emissions associated with this energy use rise by 36% in the Current Policies Scenario,
13% in the New Policies Scenario, but fall by 43% in the 450 Scenario (Figure 2.1).

© OECD/IEA, 2016

An implication of this analysis is some of the factors that have caused the slowdown in
global emissions growth in 2014 and 2015 are cyclical and might not be prolonged – the
most pronounced slowdown in economic activity over this period occurred in some of
the most energy and carbon-intensive parts of the global system, e.g. Russia, the Middle
East and other hydrocarbon exporting countries and regions. A further implication is
that, if indeed the trends seen in 2014 and 2015 are to be a turning point, then stronger
policies than those in place or envisaged today would be needed to boost improvements in
efficiency and the deployment of low-carbon energy.

1. The scenarios are defined in Chapter 1.

Chapter 2 | Overview

59

2

Figure 2.1 ⊳ Global GDP, energy demand and energy-related CO2 emissions
trajectories by scenario

Index (2000=100)

New Policies Scenario

Current Policies Scenario

450 Scenario

400

300

200
100

2000

2015
GDP

2040

2015

Total primary energy demand

2040 2015

2040

Energy-related CO2 emissions

The decoupling between growth in GDP, energy demand and emissions
is limited in the New Policies Scenario, strong in the 450 Scenario

© OECD/IEA, 2016

The projections in the New Policies Scenario illustrate some of the reasons why it is
challenging to turn the flattening of energy-related CO2 emissions in 2014 and 2015 into a
sustained fall (Table 2.1). In our projections, the annual average increase in GDP is assumed
to pick up, from 3% in 2015 to an average of 3.7% over the ten years to 2025, meaning that
improvements in energy intensity and deployment of lower carbon technologies have to
clear a higher bar in order to deliver a net reduction in emissions. Global energy intensity
continues to fall at a rate of 1.8% per year to 2040, a significant achievement given that GDP
growth is concentrated in emerging economies, where economic activity is still relatively
energy intensive. But the net result is still a stubborn upward trend in global demand for
energy (Figure 2.2).
Primary energy demand in most advanced economies is set to fall over the coming decades:
despite pockets of growth (as in Mexico, the subject of a special country focus in the
WEO-2016 series), the net trend for OECD countries as a whole is that they consume less
energy in 2040 than they do today. But this is more than offset by increases elsewhere,
with rising incomes, industrialisation and urbanisation – and rising levels of energy access
– proving to be powerful spurs for consumption. China has had a huge influence on global
energy trends since 2000 and continues to be the largest single source of global demand
growth until the mid-2020s in our projections, when it is overtaken by India. But even as
energy demand growth slows in China (Box 2.1), other countries in South and Southeast
Asia, alongside parts of Africa, the Middle East and South America where energy demand
per capita is low today, take on a more prominent role in pushing global energy demand
higher.
60

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

Table 2.1 ⊳ World primary energy demand by region in the
New Policies Scenario (Mtoe)
2000

2014

2020

2025

2030

2035

2040

CAAGR*
2014-2040

OECD

5 299

5 276

5 293

5 215

5 140

5 093

5 077

-0.1%

Americas

2 702

2 722

2 734

2 708

2 680

2 674

2 696

-0.0%

2 270

2 212

2 211

2 176

2 130

2 101

2 094

-0.2%

1 766

1 697

1 690

1 641

1 601

1 568

1 540

-0.4%

831

857

870

866

859

851

842

-0.1%

518

442

424

411

399

389

381

-0.6%

Non-OECD

4 469

8 046

8 866

9 664

10 535

11 406

12 178

1.6%

E. Europe/Eurasia

1 004

1 101

1 120

1 152

1 189

1 232

1 271

0.6%

620

686

683

696

714

737

758

0.4%

United States
Europe
Asia Oceania
Japan

Russia
Asia

2 189

4 809

5 398

5 930

6 488

7 010

7 437

1.7%

China

1 149

3 070

3 328

3 544

3 728

3 855

3 892

0.9%

India

441

824

1 033

1 225

1 457

1 700

1 938

3.3%

Southeast Asia

385

621

714

800

893

990

1 084

2.2%

Middle East

353

715

819

912

1 026

1 142

1 244

2.2%

Africa

498

781

884

979

1 085

1 207

1 336

2.1%

South Africa

111

147

148

152

158

165

173

0.6%

Latin America

424

639

646

691

747

815

890

1.3%

184

300

296

317

344

376

408

1.2%

10 042

13 684

14 576

15 340

16 185

17 057

17 866

1.0%

1 692

1 563

1 547

1 492

1 441

1 398

1 360

-0.5%

Brazil
World**
European Union

* Compound average annual growth rate. ** Includes international marine and aviation bunkers (not included in regional totals).

Thousand Mtoe

Figure 2.2 ⊳ Energy demand by region in the New Policies Scenario
20

Other
Middle East
Africa

16

Southeast Asia
India

12

China
Japan and Korea

8

European Union
North America

© OECD/IEA, 2016

4

1990

2000

2010

2020

2030

2040

The geography of global energy demand continues to shift

Chapter 2 | Overview

61

2

Continuing to hold today’s energy-related CO2 emissions flat against the backdrop of steadily
rising energy demand projected in the New Policies Scenario would require an acceleration
of efforts to reduce the carbon footprint of energy use. The growth in energy-related CO2
emissions slows from 2.4% per year since 2000 to a much more modest 0.5% per year over
the period to 2040 in this scenario. But, despite all the policies in place to deploy lowcarbon sources of energy and the commitments made to strengthen deployment in many
countries included in the NDCs in the Paris Agreement (which are incorporated into the
projections in the New Policies Scenario), there is still a residual increase in energy-related
CO2 emissions that averages around 160 million tonnes (Mt) per year. For a global energy
system that generates 32 000 Mt of CO2 each year, finding additional abatement of 160 Mt
to stabilise emissions at current levels is not a large change (albeit not nearly enough to
avoid severe impacts of climate change), but it is still the equivalent of decarbonising a
country with today’s emissions level of the Netherlands each year; or replacing 40 large
coal-fired power plants with zero-carbon electricity; or replacing more than 50 million cars
each year with electric vehicles, charged with zero-carbon electricity.
Box 2.1 ⊳ China’s economic transition gathers pace2

The re-orientation of China’s economy, away from investment in heavy industrial
sectors and towards domestic consumption and services, has profound implications
for our energy outlook for China and for global trends. Since 1990, energy-intensive
industrial activity has been the single most important source of growth in final energy
consumption in China (Figure 2.3). But in 2015, output fell in some energy-intensive
sectors, notably steel and cement. Although growth in the chemicals sector is expected
to remain strong to 2040, and aluminium also sees an increase, China’s steel and
cement production are expected to continue their decline, by around 30% and 40%
respectively. There are multiple uncertainties for the outlook for China, but the net
result in our projections in the New Policies Scenario is that aggregate energy demand
from China’s energy-intensive industries is lower in 2040 than it is today.2

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Coal feels the sharpest impact of this transition: rising industrial activity has until
now always been positive for coal consumption. This is no longer the case in the New
Policies Scenario: China’s industrial activity switches to lighter, higher technology,
higher value-added products, for which the predominant energy inputs are electricity
and natural gas. Industrial value added continues to rise, by an average of 4% per
year. But industrial coal use falls by more than one-third to 2040 – a drop equivalent
to almost one-and-a-half times Russia’s entire coal output today. This is a key reason
for the flattening in China’s projected energy-related CO2 emissions (which rise only
to 9.3 gigatonnes [Gt] in the late 2020s, before falling back to 8.8 Gt by 2040 – below
today’s level of 9.1 Gt).

2. The World Energy Outlook-2017 will include a major country focus on China.
62

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

Figure 2.3 ⊳ Change in total final consumption in China in the
New Policies Scenario

-200

0

200

400

600

800

1 000

2

Mtoe
1 200
1 400

1990-2014

2014-2040

Energy-intensive industry

Light industry

Services

Residential

Transport

Other

In the New Policies Scenario, energy-intensive industries are no longer
the spur for growth in China’s energy consumption
Note: Mtoe = million tonnes of oil equivalent.

2.2	Which fuels and technologies are poised to do well
in the new energy order?
The stronger the policy focus on mitigating the environmental impacts of
energy use, the more the energy mix shifts over the decades in favour of
renewable energy sources, nuclear power (where it is politically acceptable)
and, up to a point, natural gas, the least polluting of the fossil fuels. Yet
coal (in power) and oil (in transport and petrochemicals) have very strong
footholds in the energy system that are not easily dislodged.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

The global energy mix does not change easily. Although government policies, relative prices,
changing costs and consumer needs all create incentives to switch fuels or to introduce a
new technology in order to obtain a better energy service, in practice the energy system has
a great deal of inertia. Light bulbs and office equipment might be replaced every few years,
but the lifetimes of vehicles, factories, power plants and buildings are much longer, and each
bit of infrastructure locks in certain patterns of energy use. So, in the absence of a concerted
policy push or a dramatic change in relative prices, the positions of the different fuels and
technologies in worldwide energy use tends to be fairly stable. The Current Policies Scenario
provides a useful example of the durability of the status quo: from a share of 81% today, the
role of fossil fuels in global energy is essentially unchanged at 79% in 2040 in this scenario
(Table 2.2). Oil and coal retain their primacy as the most-used fuels.
By contrast, the 450 Scenario represents a clean break with the past, as policies re-cast the
energy system to comply with the imperative to limit greenhouse-gas (GHG) emissions.
The main policies that underpin this transformation include a much stronger drive for
Chapter 2 | Overview

63

renewables deployment in the power sector, broader adoption and stronger application
of energy efficiency policies and low-carbon forms of transport, more widespread carbon
pricing and use of carbon capture and storage (CCS) (in power and industry), and more
rapid reform of fossil-fuel subsidies. In this scenario, a wholesale shift in the way that
capital flows into the energy sector sees demand for the most carbon-intensive fuels
plummet (coal demand in 2040 is 40% of the level in the Current Policies Scenario), with
a commensurately sharp increase in renewables and other low-carbon technologies,
particularly in the power sector.
Table 2.2 ⊳ World primary energy demand by fuel and scenario (Mtoe)
New Policies

Current Policies

450 Scenario

2000

2014

2025

2040

2025

2040

2025

2040

Coal

2 316

3 926

3 955

4 140

4 361

5 327

3 175

2 000

Oil

3 669

4 266

4 577

4 775

4 751

5 402

4 169

3 326

Gas

2 071

2 893

3 390

4 313

3 508

4 718

3 292

3 301

676

662

888

1 181

865

1 032

960

1 590

Nuclear
Hydro
Bioenergy*
Other renewables
Total

225

335

420

536

414

515

429

593

1 026

1 421

1 633

1 883

1 619

1 834

1 733

2 310

60

181

478

1 037

420

809

596

1 759

10 042

13 684

15 340

17 866

15 937

19 636

14 355

14 878

Fossil-fuel share

80%

81%

78%

74%

79%

79%

74%

58%

CO2 emissions (Gt)

23.0

32.2

33.6

36.3

36.0

43.7

28.9

18.4

* Includes the traditional use of solid biomass and modern use of bioenergy.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

In the New Policies Scenario, pressure for change is bolstered by the commitments made
in the Paris Agreement and there is a tangible shift in momentum and direction compared
with the past – even if the transformation in global consumption is less profound and farreaching than in the 450 Scenario (Table 2.3). The fuel most visibly affected is coal, whose
surge in consumption in the early 2000s has slowed abruptly in recent years and went into
reverse in 2015 when global coal demand fell for the first time since the 1990s. According
to our projections in the New Policies Scenario, coal is not yet in terminal decline but
growth is anaemic at only 0.2% per year to 2040, providing scant relief for the 80% of
Chinese coal companies that were reportedly losing money in 2015 or the firms accounting
for 50% of US coal production that were under bankruptcy protection in mid-2016.
The reason that coal demand continues to rise at all is due to robust demand growth in
India and Southeast Asia – where readily available coal is difficult to ignore as an affordable
solution to fast-growing energy needs. This offsets rapid declines in coal use in North America
and the European Union. More so than for any other fuel, it is China – still by far the largest
coal producer and consumer – that holds the keys to the global coal balance. The structural
economic shift towards non energy-intensive industry and services sectors hits coal use hard
and means that, barring an unexpected dry year for hydro, China’s coal use is likely to have
64

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

peaked in 2013. On the production side, China intends to close more than 1 billion tonnes
of mining capacity in order to rebalance the market. Even if this restructuring proceeds
according to plan, China’s import needs are set to plummet by around 85% to 2040. If it
is delayed, it is conceivable that China could even become a net exporter of coal again, a
development that would prolong the current slump in international coal markets.
Table 2.3 ⊳ World primary energy demand by fuel in the
New Policies Scenario (Mtoe)

CAAGR*

2000

2014

2020

2025

2030

2035

2040

Coal

2 316

3 926

3 906

3 955

4 039

4 101

4 140

0.2%

Oil

3 669

4 266

4 474

4 577

4 630

4 708

4 775

0.4%

Gas

2 071

2 893

3 141

3 390

3 686

4 011

4 313

1.5%

676

662

796

888

1 003

1 096

1 181

2.3%

Nuclear
Hydro
Bioenergy**

225

335

377

420

463

502

536

1.8%

1 026

1 421

1 543

1 633

1 721

1 804

1 883

1.1%

60

181

339

478

643

835

1 037

6.9%

10 042

13 684

14 576

15 340

16 185

17 057

17 866

1.0%

Other renewables
Total

2014-2040

*Compound average annual growth rate. ** Includes the traditional use of solid biomass and modern use of bioenergy.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Oil demand also slows noticeably over the projection period, resulting in a compound
average growth rate of 0.5% for the period as a whole. There is a stark difference in
consumption trends between advanced economies, where vehicle ownership levels are
already high and efficiency improvements bring demand down over time, and emerging
economies, where vehicle ownership is much lower and demand for petrochemical
products and road freight services is growing much more rapidly. Oil consumption in OECD
countries falls by some 12 million barrels per day (mb/d) between today and 2040, while
non-OECD growth is closer to 19 mb/d, the net increase of 7 mb/d, alongside growth of
4 mb/d in international shipping and aviation, accounting for the overall rise in demand to
103.5 mb/d in 2040 in the New Policies Scenario. Efficiency and technology improvements,
pricing reforms (as countries phase out fossil-fuel subsidies, see section 2.9) and steadily
higher prices all serve to take the edge off oil demand growth. Although their impact is
more muted in the New Policies Scenario, the potential for electric vehicles to make a
sizeable dent in oil consumption comes through strongly in the 450 Scenario (Box 2.2).
On the supply side, there are signs that the market is rebalancing following the dramatic
drop in oil prices that began in 2014. But the impact of the severe downturn in upstream
investment in 2015 and 2016 will play out over a longer period: whether this can be easily
absorbed in future years, or whether the market will enter a period of price volatility as
it searches for a new equilibrium, is a key question (examined in detail in Chapter 3 and
summarised in section 2.6 below). The slowdown in the flow of new projects results in a
reduced period of production growth in the 2020s in some major non-OPEC producers,
notably Brazil and Canada. The destabilising effect of today’s shortfalls in hydrocarbon
revenue is reflected also in lower projected supply growth (compared with WEO-2015)
Chapter 2 | Overview

65

2

from some major OPEC countries, chief among them Venezuela, Iraq, Nigeria and Libya.
These downward revisions are offset by higher production in other areas: factoring in
the recent decline in upstream costs and a higher estimate in WEO-2016 of the tight oil
resource base, US oil production reaches a higher plateau than in last year’s Outlook, above
14 mb/d for much of the 2020s, and then tails off more slowly thereafter. In combination
with steady reductions in US demand, as fuel efficiency measures start to bite, this means
that US net imports of oil fall below 1 mb/d by 2040, down from more than 5 mb/d today.
Natural gas demand grows by nearly 50% in the New Policies Scenario over the period to
2040. The 1.5% annual rate of growth to 2040 is healthy compared with the other fossil
fuels, although considerably less than the 2.3% seen over the last 25 years. Natural gas
consumption increases almost everywhere, with the main exception of Japan, where it
falls back from today’s levels as nuclear power is reintroduced: China and the Middle East
are the largest sources of growth. But, in the face of strong competition and saturation
effects in some mature markets, the natural gas industry has to work hard to secure new
outlets for its product. Gas prices rise steadily in all regions as the current supply overhang
is absorbed. By 2025, in gas-importing countries in Asia (in the absence of carbon pricing)
new gas plants would be a cheaper option than new coal plants for baseload generation
only if coal prices were $150/tonne. The space for gas-fired generation is also squeezed in
many markets by the rising share and falling costs of renewables. Gas demand for industry
increases more quickly (at 2.1% per year) than for power (1.3%); the fastest growth (3.4%),
albeit from a low base, comes from natural gas use in transport, including liquefied natural
gas (LNG) for heavy goods vehicles and for shipping.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Gas production growth is dominated over the period to 2020 by Australia and the United
States, but thereafter the increase in supply comes from a larger range of countries. East
Africa emerges as a new gas province thanks to large offshore developments in Mozambique
and Tanzania. Egypt makes a comeback with the start of production from the major Zohr
field, as does Argentina with the development of its promising shale gas resource in the
Vaca Muerta region. After remaining relatively flat into the early 2020s, Russia’s output
rises again as a new pipeline route opens up to bring gas to China, but a larger share of the
increase in international trade is taken by LNG. New projects in North America, Australia,
Africa, the Middle East and Russia help to boost the share of LNG in inter-regional gas trade
from 42% today to 53% in 2040. The gradual removal of contractual restrictions, such as
destination clauses, also eases the emergence of a globalised gas market in which prices
are increasingly determined by the interplay of gas supply and demand.
The largest expansion in the primary energy mix comes from renewables (examined in
section 2.3 and in detail in Part B of this Outlook). The expansion shown in Figure 2.4
actually underplays the rise in modern renewable technologies, as it includes also the use
of solid biomass as a fuel for cooking in developing countries, which is a mark of energy
poverty rather than a positive contribution to low-carbon development. In the case of
nuclear, even though one-sixth of the global nuclear fleet is retired in the next decade (80%
of this in OECD countries), overall prospects are buoyed by large new build programmes in
a select group of countries led by China, Russia and India.
66

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

Figure 2.4 ⊳ Global primary energy mix in the New Policies Scenario (Mtoe)
2014
India United States

China

2

European Union
OECD Asia
OECD Asia

Coal
3 926

United States

Middle East
Russia
China

Middle East
Total
13 684
Mtoe

Gas
2 893

European Union

Oil
4 266

European Union

Other Asia
United States
Renewables
1 937

Nuclear
662

China
OECD Asia
Russia
United States
European Union

European Union
La n America
United States
China
Africa
2040
Other Asia

India

China

United States
OECD Asia

Coal
4 140

United States

Other Asia
India

Middle East

Middle East

China
Total
17 866
Mtoe

Gas
4 313

Russia

Oil
4 775

United States

European Union
China
Renewables
3 455

China
European Union
United States
Africa
Lan America

Nuclear
1 181

Russia
OECD Asia
European Union
United States
China

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Renewables, followed by natural gas, are the main winners to 2040
Notes: The ranking of top-five demand regions for renewables excludes the traditional use of solid biomass as it is not
a sustainable renewable energy source. However, in order to account for total primary energy demand in full, this is
included in the aggregate number for renewables. OECD Asia = Japan, Korea, Australia and New Zealand. Other Asia =
non-OECD countries in Asia, excluding China and India.

Chapter 2 | Overview

67

Box 2.2 ⊳ Are electric vehicles about to make their move?

The global stock of electric cars passed the one million mark in 2015 and momentum
looks to have been maintained in key markets in the first-half of 2016 – electric vehicle
registrations in China rose by 130% year-on-year (helped by the fact that this avoids
the lottery by which conventional vehicle registrations are assigned in major Chinese
cities). Growth has been underpinned by policy support, the development of new
models with clear consumer appeal and continuous improvement in the energy density
of batteries; average battery costs in 2015 were less than $270 per kilowatt-hour (kWh)
for plug-in electric hybrids and an estimated $210/kWh for battery electric cars (BEVs).
In the New Policies Scenario, ownership of electric cars picks up quickly to 10 million
in 2020, exceeds 30 million by 2025 and 150 million in 2040. By 2040, one-in-nine
passenger vehicles in China is electric and growth is also strong in parts of Europe and
North America. But the overall share in the global passenger vehicle stock remains
relatively small, at 8% in 2040, and oil demand is lowered by only 0.3 mb/d in 2025
and 1.3 mb/d in 2040. One reason is that, even though battery costs for BEVs decline to
$125/kWh by 2025 and $100/kWh by 2040, this is not enough to achieve full cost-parity
with conventional cars and policies in place or envisaged today are not sufficiently
widespread or strong to bridge the gap.
The outlook changes in the 450 Scenario. Policies that include more stringent
regulations on fuel economy and tailpipe emissions, and greater support to the buildup of recharging infrastructure, provide a large boost to sales. The global stock of
electric passenger cars rises to more than 700 million by 2040, displacing more than
6 mb/d of oil demand. With the parallel decarbonisation of the power sector in this
scenario, the combination of smart grids and the storage provided by vehicle batteries
also provides the co-benefit of supporting the integration of renewable power.

2.3

Are there limits to growth for renewable energy?
The contribution from renewable energy grows faster than that from any
other source, in all scenarios, in large part due to the expansion of wind and
solar PV in the power sector. Increasing deployment of variable renewables
brings a continuing decline in their cost. But there is also the risk, if the power
system is not well designed to integrate a rising share of wind and solar, that
the energy transition could become less efficient and more expensive as a
result. Solutions are to hand, but have to be applied. There is large untapped
potential for renewable energy in heat production and transport, but policy

© OECD/IEA, 2016

attention and technology improvement in these areas have lagged behind.

Renewable energy is the major growth story in all the scenarios in WEO-2016. Even in the
Current Policies Scenario, policies already in place are sufficient to make renewables the
fastest-growing of all the sources of primary energy. But current policies barely scratch
68

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

the surface of renewables’ potential, either as a source of power, heat or mobility. In the
New Policies Scenario, the additional impact of new policy announcements and declared
intentions – many of which were made in connection with the Paris Agreement – leads to a
further acceleration in deployment (Figure 2.5). More ambitious policies and targets have
been facilitated by the large cost reductions seen in recent years: solar photovoltaics (PV)
have led the way with both utility- and small-scale projects seeing declines of 35-80% in
leading markets since 2010. Over the period to 2040, renewables account for almost 60%
of all new power generation capacity additions in the New Policies Scenario. By 2040, wind
and solar combined have more installed capacity than any other source of generation.
Figure 2.5 ⊳ Shares of global demand met by renewable energy in selected
sectors in the New Policies and 450 Scenarios

Total demand
Renewables

2014

2040
New Policies Scenario

Indirect renewables

2040
450 Scenario

39

34

24

58%
37%

Electricity
(Thousand TWh)

23%

6.1

5.0

5.3

Heat
(Thousand Mtoe)

22%

15%

9%

3.4

2.6

2.7

Transport
(Thousand Mtoe)

3%

20%
7%

Three steps forward for renewables in the New Policies Scenario:
a step-change in the 450 Scenario

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Note: Indirect renewables refers to renewables-based electricity or combined heat and power that is then used for heat
or transport fuels.

The attention to renewables is typically focussed on their place in the power sector,
but renewable resources are also used in end-use sectors to meet heat demand and as
a transport fuel. Use for heat can either be direct (from bioenergy or solar thermal, for
example) or indirect (via renewables-based electricity or heat from combined heat and
power plants). Use in the transport sector is as biofuels, mainly for road transport. In the
New Policies Scenario (excluding the traditional use of solid biomass as a cooking fuel),
the use of renewables-based heat in industry and in buildings both rise, but their share in
total heat demand does not exceed 15%. In the case of biofuels, subsidies and advances in
technology support a near tripling in consumption to 4.2 mboe/d in 2040 (65% ethanol),
representing some 6% of transport fuel demand.
Chapter 2 | Overview

69

2

The 450 Scenario pushes the deployment of renewables significantly beyond the levels
implied by today’s measures and policy intentions. The power sector is largely decarbonised
by 2040, with the share of renewables in generation rising to almost 60% (Figure 2.6). The
share of renewables in the provision of heat rises to more than one-fifth. Higher blending
mandates and other support measures increase biofuels consumption to almost 9 mboe/d
by 2040, with biofuels making in-roads into shipping and aviation in this scenario. There is
no shortage in aggregate of potential renewables supply to meet our projections over this
timeframe, even if, as in other scenarios, there is a shortage in some countries of viable
sites for new hydropower projects. Intensive wind deployment and the large demand for
biofuels in a 450 Scenario do, though, result in a deterioration in the quality of the available
resource as operators move to second- or third-tier sites for wind parks, or biofuels
cultivation moves to more marginal land.
Figure 2.6 ⊳ Evolution of the power generation mix in the 450 Scenario
2014
23 800 TWh

2040
34 100 TWh

11%

16%
67%

3%
1%
2%

Nuclear
Hydro
Wind
Solar PV
Other renewables
CCS
Unabated fossil
fuels

16%

18%

8%
20%

11%
9%
18%

The power sector is transformed and almost decarbonised by 2040 in the 450 Scenario

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Notes: CCS = carbon capture and storage; TWh = terawatt-hours.

To the extent that renewables in the power sector test the limits of growth they do so for
two reasons. First, particularly in countries with low rates of growth in electricity demand
and very strong decarbonisation goals, the desired pace of change may exceed the natural
rate at which existing capacity is retired. There is no technical barrier to early retirement of
existing assets, but the political challenges can be a different matter and early retirement
comes with a cost – an increase in the amount of overall investment or, in some instances,
a claim for compensation for lost income. Second is the impact of variable renewables on
the operation and reliability of the power system as a whole. At low shares of penetration
in the power mix, wind and solar PV are unlikely to pose significant challenges. Yet, the
deployment of such technologies to levels consistent with the 450 Scenario (as well as
70

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

within some regions in the New Policies Scenario) requires a significant upgrade in technical,
institutional, policy and market design, collectively known as system integration measures.
In the absence of these measures to increase the flexibility of the system, there is a risk
that wind or solar capacity would face significant curtailment during times of abundant
generation, which could undermine the economics of projects, deter investment and make
these technologies less effective as emissions abatement options. As shown in Chapter 12,
any power system in which wind and solar PV installations face a regular risk of having their
production curtailed is taking an expensive and inefficient route towards decarbonisation.
Flexibility, in power system terms, is traditionally associated with generators that can change
their output very quickly (typically reservoir hydropower or gas-fired plants). But there
are multiple potential sources of flexibility that can be exploited to shift the timing of the
demand or of the delivery of supply in order to accommodate large shares of renewables.
Markets can be designed in a way that incentivise investment in locations and technologies
that offer the best value to the system as a whole, i.e. capable of delivering power at
times of day and in places when it is particularly needed. Strengthening the network or
integrating with neighbouring systems make it possible to aggregate output over a larger
area, helping to smooth fluctuations that might occur in individual locations. Although its
use has been limited so far (with the partial exception of pumped storage hydro), utilityscale storage offers promise – especially once costs come down – to accommodate supply
and demand mismatches.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Another approach is to induce flexibility on the demand side, either by moving consumption
in time without affecting the total electricity demand (e.g. shifting the use of a washing
machine or the charge of an electric vehicle to a different time period), or by interrupting
demand at short notice (e.g. stopping industrial production for a given amount of time) or
adjusting the intensity of demand for a certain amount of time (e.g. reducing the thermostat
temperature of space heaters or air conditioners to lower electricity demand at that time).
As examined in detail in Chapter 12, a judicious mix of these solutions in the 450 Scenario
can allow for very high shares of variable renewables in power systems, while reducing
curtailment to negligible levels below 2.5% of their annual output in 2040. System integration
measures provide the essential enabling mechanism for high growth of renewable power.
In the end-use sectors, there is a mixture of barriers that impede rapid growth in renewables.
Technological progress has been much less rapid than in the case of wind or solar PV
power, not least because policies that can help renewable heat technologies achieve
full commerciality are much less widespread than those supporting renewables-based
electricity. Not all sources of renewables for heat offer the range of heating temperatures
demanded, especially in industry; but there is still ample scope for further penetration of
solar thermal heating for use in the residential or services sectors or in low-temperature
applications, such as textiles and food processing. Bioenergy offers a wider range of heating
temperatures, although logistics and supply chain problems could emerge as a constraint
on large-volume consumption. Research and development is still essential to bring down
costs and to open up new areas for growth, for example solar thermal heating for mediumtemperature industrial applications, or renewables-based cooling systems for buildings
and industry.
Chapter 2 | Overview

71

2

The largest constraint in the end-use sectors applies to the expansion of biofuels supply.
Reaching the level of biofuels projected in the 450 Scenario implies a significant increase
in the volume of the biomass feedstocks that would be required to fuel the production
facilities. This could be achieved through the use of under-utilised or derelict land and by
increasing agricultural productivity (although measures to improve productivity, notably
irrigation and fertilisers, also have a heavy energy footprint); the increased use of advanced
biofuels in the 450 Scenario also helps to minimise the impacts. Nonetheless, the potential
for tension remains: with other land and water users; with other policy priorities, e.g. food
security; as well as with emissions reductions goals, if direct or indirect land use changes
due to biofuels cultivation cause additional GHG gas emissions.

2.4

Staying below the 2 oC climate change limit: what would be required?
An emissions trajectory consistent with the 450 Scenario would require a
step-change in policy action in the direction of much more efficiency and
higher reliance across different end-uses on low or zero-carbon electricity.
As the power sector moves closer to full decarbonisation – as in the
450 Scenario, and even more so in any well below 2 °C pathway – so the
battleground for further GHG emissions reductions moves to areas that are
difficult to electrify, such as freight, air and maritime transport and various
heavy industrial processes, and to potential technologies to remove CO2
from the atmosphere.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Energy production and use account for the majority of global GHG emissions today;
pledges relating to the energy sector were also at the heart of many countries’ NDCs, the
building blocks of the Paris Agreement. Yet, as discussed above, the New Policies Scenario
that incorporates these pledges sees a continued, albeit gradual, rise in energy-related
CO2 emissions to 2040 (Figure 2.7). Self-evidently, this fails to satisfy the aim embedded
in the Paris Agreement to reach a “global peaking of greenhouse-gas emissions as soon as
possible”.
The scope to mitigate emissions further stretches across the entire energy sector. Despite
the impressive growth of renewables in the power sector in recent years, two-thirds of
power generation today continues to rely on fossil fuels, with the result that the power
sector contributes more than 40% of current energy-related CO2 emissions. The transport
sector (with 23%) is the next largest contributor to GHG emissions; long-standing policy
efforts promoting fuel efficiency and alternative fuels have paid dividends, but well over
90% of the world’s road transport fleet continues to run on oil products. Industry (20% of
energy-related CO2 emissions) sources nearly three-quarters of its energy directly from
fossil fuels; the comparable figure for buildings (with 9% of emissions) is closer to onethird, but the buildings sector is the largest consumer of electricity, and so is a major source
of the demand that leads to emissions from power generation.

72

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

Figure 2.7 ⊳ Global primary energy demand and related CO2 emissions
Primary energy demand

20

Gt

Thousand Mtoe

by scenario

50

2

CO2 emissions

40

15

30
10
20
5

10

1990

2015
Current Policies Scenario

2040

1990
New Policies Scenario

2015

2040
450 Scenario

While energy sector CO2 emissions rise by 4 Gt in the New Policies Scenario,
they fall by 14 Gt in the 450 Scenario
Note: Gt = gigatonnes.

The 450 Scenario depicts a low-carbon transition compatible with limiting the average
global temperature increase in 2100 to 2 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels. It
requires that emissions peak before 2020 and then drop steadily to around 18 Gt by 2040.
Moving to this trajectory is the dominant focus for the analysis of the energy transition in
WEO-2016. In addition, this Outlook includes a first assessment of even more ambitious
emissions reduction pathways that, in the words of the Paris Agreement, can keep the
rise in the global mean temperature to “well below 2 °C”, and pursue “efforts to limit the
temperature increase to 1.5 °C” (Box 2.3).

© OECD/IEA, 2016

In the New Policies Scenario, the growth of low-carbon sources of power generation is
sufficient to achieve the first stage in the decoupling of electricity generation from power
sector emissions: electricity generation rises by two-thirds over the period to 2040, but
power-related CO2 emissions stagnate, rising only modestly above today’s level. As a result,
the emissions intensity of power generation falls from around 515 grammes of CO2 per
kilowatt-hour (g CO2/kWh) today to around 335 g CO2/kWh in 2040 (Figure 2.8), a rate of
improvement faster than that of any other sector.
But, to align with the 450 Scenario, the emissions intensity of power generation needs to
fall much further and faster, to around 80 g CO2/kWh. The additional reduction is facilitated
by higher CO2 prices and extended policy support to low-carbon generation, with the largest
increases – as we have seen – in wind and solar generation. Nuclear generation also rises,
with an absolute increase comparable to that of all solar technologies combined. Carbon
capture and storage becomes an important protection strategy for fossil-fuel assets that
Chapter 2 | Overview

73

have recently been built and have not recovered their investment costs: by 2040, some
430 GW of fossil-fuel plants are equipped with CCS in the 450 Scenario, of which more than
half is in China, the country with the largest coal fleet today (at almost 50% of the global
total).
Figure 2.8 ⊳ Emissions intensity of global electricity generation in the
g CO2/kWh

New Policies and 450 Scenarios

600
500
400
300
200
100
2014

New Policies Scenario
450 Scenario
2040

© OECD/IEA, 2016

CO2 emissions intensity of global electricity generation falls significantly
in the New Policies Scenario, but drops substantially more in the 450 Scenario

The effort is not only required on the supply side: reductions in electricity demand in a
450 Scenario also contribute almost one-quarter of the required power-sector emissions
savings. Much of these (as illustrated in detail in Chapter 7) come from electric motor
systems, which – in different appliances and equipment across the end-use sectors –
consume more than one-in-two kilowatt-hours consumed worldwide. By 2040, increased
industrial activity – much of which is in China and India – would imply a doubling of global
electricity use for motors in industrial motor systems. The energy efficiency policies applied
in the New Policies Scenario contain this growth to 80%. These policies tend to focus just
on efficiency of the motor and are already quite widespread – almost 90% of the industrial
electric motors sold worldwide today are already covered by mandatory energy efficiency
standards. However, capturing the larger savings available in the motor system as a whole
requires a shift in attention from standards for single components to a system-wide energy
efficiency approach. This encompasses not just stricter and wider regulation of motors
and other equipment (e.g. pumps), but also the uptake of variable speed drives and a
suite of other measures to do with system maintenance (such as fixing leaks or reducing
pressure losses), predictive maintenance and a better match of the size of equipment to
demand needs. The additional cumulative investment of around $300 billion for efficiency
improvements in industrial electric motor systems in the 450 Scenario is far outweighed by
avoided investment in power generation, of $450 billion.
74

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

Box 2.3 ⊳ Exploring the implications of a “well below 2 °C” or a 1.5 °C
emissions pathway

The Paris Agreement does not include a precise definition of what holding the
temperature rise to “well below 2 °C”, while also pursuing efforts to limit global warming
to 1.5 °C, means as a target for climate action. One interpretation of the goals is as a
range spanning a scenario that provides a reasonable chance of staying below 1.5 °C
at the lower end, to a scenario that provides a reasonable chance of staying below
2 °C at the upper end. The 450 Scenario, for example, has a 50% chance of limiting
the temperature rise to 2 °C and therefore lies at the top of this range. But within
this putative range, we can select an illustrative case to explore some of the potential
implications for the energy sector of aiming to go beyond the mitigation levels in the
450 Scenario. One such case, for which the “CO2 budgets” have been examined in
detail by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), has a 66% chance of
staying below 2 °C. It would imply a 50% chance of a 1.84 oC temperature rise in 2100.
Figure 2.9 ⊳ Indicative global energy sector emissions budgets and
35

1 400

30

1 200

25

1 000

20

800

15

600

"well below 2 °C" case

400

10
5
2000

Gt

Gt

trajectories for different decarbonisation pathways

2020

200

450 Scenario

1.5 °C case

2040

2060

2080

2100

Cumulative
2015-2100

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Without net-negative emissions, energy sector CO2 emissions fall to zero by 2040
for a 50% chance of 1.5 °C and around 2060 for a 66% chance of 2 °C

The remaining energy sector CO2 budget between 2015 and 2100 in this illustrative “well
below 2 °C” case is 830 Gt, some 250 Gt, or 25%, less than the 450 Scenario energy sector
CO2 budget (Figure 2.9). Multiple emissions trajectories are consistent with this CO2
budget, but one that avoids relying on global emissions turning net-negative requires
energy-related CO2 emissions to be at net-zero by around 2060. Energy-related CO2
emissions in 2040 would need to be around 16 Gt, just over 2 Gt lower than emissions in
the 450 Scenario. While this might not appear to be an enormous escalation of ambition,
Chapter 2 | Overview

75

2

it is important to place it in context of the changes already implemented in the
450 Scenario: by 2040, residual emissions occur only in those sectors that are
particularly challenging to decarbonise.
The transformation beyond the 450 Scenario and towards “well below 2 °C” presents
a formidable challenge: marginal emissions reductions require non-marginal changes
to the energy system. For example, three-quarters of the global passenger light-duty
vehicle fleet would need to be electric by 2040, up from one-third in the 450 Scenario.
To satisfy the consequent increase in electricity demand, 180 GW of additional power
capacity would be required above the level in the 450 Scenario, while the share of lowcarbon capacity in the power mix would need to rise to almost 80% (from more than
70% in the 450 Scenario). Additional effort is also required in the buildings sector. Oil
demand would fall to 63 mb/d in 2040, around 11 mb/d below the 450 Scenario, while
gas and coal demand would be 370 bcm and 110 Mtce lower respectively.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Pursuing efforts to stay below a temperature rise of 1.5 °C present an even more
challenging goal. The IPCC indicated that to have a 50% chance of keeping global warming
to 1.5 °C, the remaining CO2 budget from 2015 ranges between 400 and 450 Gt CO2. But
more recent reports have suggested it could be as low as 50 Gt CO2. Even if the CO2
budget is at the upper end of this range, at around 400 Gt CO2, energy sector emissions
would need to fall to net-zero by around 2040, if global energy-related CO2 emissions
cannot turn net-negative at any point. This would require, within the next two-and-ahalf decades, all passenger and light-commercial vehicles to be electric, practically all
residential and commercial buildings to be at zero emissions and, in the industry sector,
a drastic acceleration of energy and material efficiency alongside increased use of lowcarbon fuels. Electricity demand would be boosted to about twice the level of today, 90%
of which would be provided by renewables and nuclear. Fossil-fuel use in 2040 would
largely be confined to oil and natural gas, with gas demand one-third below today’s level
and oil demand falling to less than 40 mb/d. Any residual emissions would need to be
compensated by biomass use with CCS (BECCS), for example in the power sector. Given
the depth of decarbonisation by 2040 required to limiting warming to 1.5 °C, it is highly
likely that CO2 emissions would need to turn net-negative at some point in time. But the
longer the date of net-zero emissions is delayed, the larger the level of BECCS that is
subsequently required. In any event, energy sector CO2 emissions would need to fall to
zero at some point between 2040 and 2060. The unavoidable conclusion is that there is
an urgent need for immediate radical reductions in energy sector CO2 emissions if there
is to be any chance of achieving the 1.5 °C goal.
Compared with the power sector, rapid decarbonisation of end-uses – notably transport
and industry – presents an even tougher proposition. In the transport sector, demand for
mobility and freight is growing fast; but options to reduce the dependency of the sector
on oil are not yet available at scale, even if fuel-economy standards (for cars, if not yet for
trucks in many countries) do moderate the rate at which oil demand grows. Electric vehicles
76

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

can loosen oil’s grip, but overcoming the deployment hurdles that are linked to high battery
costs will require more dedicated efforts to achieve large-scale market commercialisation
(see Box 2.2 and Chapter 3). Natural gas offers a lower carbon alternative to oil, well
suited to road freight and international shipping in the form of LNG, but not a route to
zero emissions. Advanced biofuels can play a critical role in decarbonising the aviation and
maritime sectors, (where other options are limited), as well as road freight, but have not
yet achieved commercialisation at scale. As in the transport sector, energy efficiency offers
the main route to lower carbon intensity in the industry sector, alongside further efforts
(including research) to develop renewable options for industrial heat production and to
ensure that CCS becomes commercially available. The emissions intensity of buildings is
much lower than other end-use sectors. The sector is the largest consumer of electricity
and is a close second (after industry) for heat, and substantial emissions reduction in the
buildings sector depends on reducing demand for both, via higher standards for appliances,
lighting, air conditioners and other equipment and improving building insulation to reduce
heating and cooling needs. As the power sector moves closer to full decarbonisation
(as it does in the 450 Scenario, and even more so in a well below 2 °C pathway), so the
battleground for further emissions reductions is set to move ever more firmly towards
these end-use sectors.

2.5

What can the energy sector do to reduce air pollution?3
Fuel combustion in the energy sector is the main origin of the air pollutants
that are a major public health hazard. Technologies to tackle this issue are
well known, but – despite growing attention to this issue – the problem is far
from being solved. Reconciling the world’s energy requirement with its need
for cleaner air is possible; and a strategy based on cleaner energy, clean
cooking facilities and advanced pollution controls can go hand-in-hand
with progress towards other environmental and development goals.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Around 6.5 million premature deaths worldwide are attributed each year to poor air quality,
making this the world’s fourth-largest threat to human health after high blood pressure,
dietary risks and smoking. This is an energy sector problem, as energy production and use,
mostly from unregulated, poorly regulated or inefficient fuel combustion, are the single
most important man-made sources of air pollutant emissions: 85% of particulate matter
and almost all of the sulfur oxides and nitrogen oxides (Figure 2.10). These three pollutants
are responsible for the most widespread impacts of air pollution, either directly or once
transformed into other pollutants via chemical reactions in the atmosphere.
Each of the main pollutants is linked with a main fuel and source. In the case of fine
particulate matter, this is the wood and other solid biomass that some 2.7 billion people
use for cooking and kerosene used for lighting (and in some countries also for cooking),
3. This analysis is drawn from Energy and Air Pollution-World Energy Outlook Special Report, released in June 2016
(IEA, 2016a). Available at www.worldenergyoutlook.org/airpollution.

Chapter 2 | Overview

77

2

which creates smoky environments that are associated with around 3.5 million premature
deaths each year. These effects of energy poverty are felt mostly in developing countries
in Asia and sub-Saharan Africa. Finer particles, whether inhaled indoors or outdoors, are
particularly harmful to health as they can penetrate deep into the lungs.
Figure 2.10 ⊳ Estimated anthropogenic emissions of the main air pollutants
by source, 2015

Nitrogen oxides (NOx)
108 Mt

Sulfur dioxides (SO2)
81 Mt

Fine particulate matter (PM 2.5)
41 Mt

Coal
43%
Oil
61%

Coal

Bioenergy
43%

Oil

Gas

Bioenergy

Other

Combustion of oil, coal and biomass was responsible for most of the
man-made emissions of the main air pollutants in 2015

© OECD/IEA, 2016

The main fuel associated with sulfur dioxide emissions is coal (although high-sulfur oil
products, such as those still permitted for use in maritime transport, are also a major
contributor): sulfur dioxide emissions are a cause of respiratory illnesses and a precursor
of acid rain. Fuels used for transport, first and foremost diesel, generate more than half the
nitrogen oxides emitted globally, which can trigger respiratory problems and the formation
of other hazardous particles and pollutants, including ozone. These emissions are linked
with industrialisation and urbanisation, and coal and oil are the main sources (natural gas
emits far less air pollution than other fossil fuels, or biomass). The unabated combustion
of coal and oil in power plants, industrial facilities and vehicles is the main cause of the
outdoor pollution linked to around 3 million premature deaths each year.
In the New Policies Scenario, the toll from air pollution on human life is set to rise (Box 2.4).
So what more can the energy sector do to tackle this public health crisis? A Special Report
in the WEO-2016 series proposes a cost-effective strategy, based on existing technologies
and proven policies, to cut 2040 pollutant emissions by more than half compared with
our main scenario. This Clean Air Scenario relies on government action in three key areas,
adapted in tailored combinations to reflect different national and regional settings:


78

An ambitious long-term air quality goal, to which all stakeholders can subscribe and
against which the various pollution mitigation options can be assessed.
World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends





A package of clean air policies for the energy sector. This includes an accelerated
energy transition, with a greater emphasis on efficiency, urban planning and on
providing energy services in a way that avoids fuel combustion; it incorporates
stringent emissions limits on combustion plants and vehicles, fuel switching to lesspolluting fuels and strict regulation of fuel quality; and it embraces effective action to
achieve full, universal access to cleaner cooking fuels and to electricity.
Effective monitoring, enforcement, evaluation and communication to keep the strategy
on track.

The Clean Air Scenario builds on the success already achieved in different parts of the
world in improving air quality, by municipal and regional governments (which have often
played a pioneering role in developing a policy response to air pollution) and through
national and international efforts. It is also mindful of some pitfalls: for example, the large
gap between test data and the higher real-world pollutant emissions from diesel vehicles,
which underlines the essential nature of adequate enforcement and compliance.
Box 2.4 ⊳ Solutions to air pollution are well known, but in the

New Policies Scenario the problem remains far from solved

© OECD/IEA, 2016

In the New Policies Scenario, growing attention to air pollution, together with an
accelerating energy transition post-COP21, puts aggregate global emissions of the main
pollutants on a slowly declining trend to 2040. Although no country has solved the
problem entirely, emissions of most major pollutants are already falling in many OECD
countries. A de-coupling of energy demand from pollutant emissions also comes into
view in other emerging economies (Figure 2.11). In China, a strong policy focus on air
quality bears fruit as energy consumption growth slows, the energy mix diversifies away
from coal and strict pollution controls are enforced. In India, energy demand rises by
135% over the period to 2040, although tighter standards in the power and transport
sectors, the replacement of traditional cooking fuels with liquefied petroleum gas
(LPG) and ambitious targets for wind and solar, all help to limit the growth in pollutant
emissions to around 10%. However, in the absence of stronger regulation, economic
growth in sub-Saharan Africa (excluding South Africa) is set to be accompanied by a
steady deterioration in air quality.
Despite the intensified policy efforts, regional demographic trends and rising energy use
and urbanisation, especially in developing Asia, mean that the number of premature
deaths attributable to outdoor air pollution grows from 3 million today to 4.5 million in
2040. Asia accounts for almost 90% of this rise as poor air quality affects a larger share
of an increasingly urban population. In China, an ageing population becomes more
vulnerable to the effects of air pollution, even though aggregate pollutant emissions
fall. The worldwide health impacts from household air pollution improve somewhat,
due to access to improved cookstoves and alternatives to solid biomass for cooking, but
almost 3 million premature deaths are still attributable to household pollution in 2040.
Chapter 2 | Overview

79

2

Figure 2.11 ⊳ Change in energy demand and energy-related air pollutants
1 200

China

India

Africa

18

Mt

Mtoe

in selected regions in the New Policies Scenario, today to 2040

800

12

400

6

0

0
-6
-12

Energy demand
(left axis):
Wind, solar
and other
Fossil fuels
and biomass
Pollutants
(right axis):
PM2.5
NOX
SO2

-18
The link between pollutant emissions and energy demand weakens in the New Policies
Scenario, but the extent of decoupling varies significantly by country and regions

© OECD/IEA, 2016

With only a 7% increase in total energy investment over the period to 2040, compared
with the New Policies Scenario, this Clean Air Scenario produces a sharp improvement
in health outcomes: premature deaths from outdoor air pollution are 1.7 million lower
in 2040 and, from household pollution, 1.6 million lower (Figure 2.12). Investment in the
Clean Air Scenario includes an extra $2.3 trillion in advanced pollution control technologies
(two-thirds of this to comply with higher vehicle emissions standards) and $2.5 trillion in
a more rapid transformation of the energy sector. The resultant benefits are many times
more valuable. The share of India’s population exposed to air with a high concentration of
fine particles (higher than the least stringent of the World Health Organisation’s interim
targets) falls to less than 20% in 2040 from more than 60% today; in China, this figure
shrinks below one-quarter (from well over half), and in Indonesia and South Africa it
falls almost to zero. Access to clean cooking for all is instrumental in securing life-saving
reductions in particulate emissions. The extra impetus to the energy transition means
that global energy demand is nearly 15% lower in 2040 than in the New Policies Scenario,
thanks to improvements in energy efficiency, while the use of renewables (except biomass)
increases more quickly. Of the energy that is combusted, three-quarters is subject to
advanced pollution controls by 2040, compared with around 45% today.
Air pollution policy cannot be viewed in isolation: it is closely linked not only to policies for
energy, but also to those dealing with climate, transport, trade, agriculture, biodiversity
and other issues. Well-designed air quality strategies have major co-benefits for other
policy goals. Improving air quality, via greater efficiency and increased deployment of
renewables, goes hand-in-hand with the broader energy sector transformation agreed at
COP21 – the Clean Air Scenario provides for an early peak in carbon-dioxide emissions, a
80

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

central objective of the Paris Agreement. Reducing pollutant emissions improves water and
soil quality, crop yields and, in turn, food security. Tackling household air pollution, via the
provision of modern energy for cooking and lighting, promotes sustainable development
goals dealing with poverty, education and gender equality. But policy-makers also need
to be wary of some potential trade-offs. Measures to address climate change could, for
example, lead in some instances to more air pollution: an isolated focus on reducing CO2
emissions by encouraging the use of wood stoves, diesel cars or biofuels, could increase
human exposure to fine particles. Similarly, an exclusive focus on direct emissions controls,
rather than the package of measures proposed in the Clean Air Scenario, could result in
increased commitments to high-carbon energy infrastructure, such as coal-fired power
plants. Integrated policy approaches, in this area as in many others, are essential.
Figure 2.12 ⊳ Premature deaths attributable to global air pollution in the
Million premature deaths

New Policies and Clean Air Scenarios, 2040

5

New Policies Scenario
Clean Air Scenario

-37%

4
3

-54%
2
1

Outdoor

Household

With a 7% increase in investment, premature deaths attributable
to air pollution are down sharply in a Clean Air Scenario

2.6

Energy investment – is capital heading where it is needed?
Energy investment activity in 2015 was characterised by a fall in spending on
oil and gas, compared with the previous year, while investment in renewables
for power generation remained buoyant. A major reallocation of capital,
away from fossil fuels and towards renewables and efficiency, would need
to be sustained and deepened in a 450 Scenario. But continued weakness
in upstream activity would create the risk of price spikes and volatility, if the

© OECD/IEA, 2016

demand anticipated in the New Policies Scenario is to be met.

In 2015, around $1.8 trillion was invested in the global energy sector (IEA, 2016b), a total
that includes fossil-fuel exploration and production, power generation across different
technologies, networks and other energy infrastructure, and demand-side measures to
Chapter 2 | Overview

81

2

improve energy efficiency. Of the $1.8 trillion, around $1.6 trillion was in energy supply,
with fossil-fuel supply representing the largest share (some $900 billion) and the power
sector accounting for most of the remaining $700 billion. Investments in energy efficiency
were around $220 billion. Fossil-fuel investment was almost 20% lower than in 2014,
pulled down by lower prices and lower upstream costs, and 2016 is set to be a second
consecutive year of falling upstream oil and gas investment – the first time this has
happened since the mid-1980s. Conversely, capital spending in the power sector was up
around 5% on 2014, including almost $300 billion of investment in renewable sources of
electricity.
The starting point for this Outlook is, therefore, a depressed level of investment activity in
oil and gas, compared with recent years, but a more positive picture for renewables-based
electricity, amid evidence of cost deflation in all sectors. The question posed by the IEA
World Energy Investment 2016 report is what comes next: will there be a cyclical upswing
towards a higher carbon path or is the current situation the first sign of a structural lowcarbon upswing towards decarbonisation?
Table 2.4 ⊳ Cumulative global energy supply investment by type and
scenario, 2016-2040 ($2015 billion)
2010-15*
Per year
Fossil fuels

New Policies

Current Policies

450 Scenario

Cumulative Per year

Cumulative Per year

Cumulative Per year

1 112

26 626

1 065

32 849

1 314

17 263

691

Renewables

283

7 478

299

6 130

245

12 582

503

Electricity networks

229

8 059

322

8 860

354

7 204

288

Other low-carbon**
Total supply
Energy efficiency

13

1 446

58

1 259

50

2 842

114

1 637

43 609

1 744

49 098

1 964

39 891

1 596

221

22 980

919

15 437

617

35 042

1 402

© OECD/IEA, 2016

* The methodology for energy efficiency investment derives from a baseline of efficiency levels in different end-use
sectors in 2014, the annual figure for energy efficiency in this column is the figure only for 2015. ** Includes nuclear
and CCS.

The answer, unsurprisingly, depends on the scenario. Comparisons based on the monetary
value of investment cannot be conclusive, as they do not take account of changes in
underlying costs that – as the last few years have shown – can vary sharply from year
to year. But the overall investment figures for the various scenarios provide some useful
orientation (Table 2.4). The Current Policies Scenario unambiguously requires a cyclical
upswing in investment towards a higher carbon path. In this scenario, fossil-fuel extraction,
transport and oil refining, along with power plants using coal or gas, require two-thirds of
total investment in energy supply, and the annual average investment in oil and gas supply
over the period to 2040, at $1.1 trillion, is well in excess of the $900 billion on average
that went into these sectors over the last five years. Equally clear, the 450 Scenario would
require a massive reallocation of capital: a sustained increase in the capital flows going to
82

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

low-carbon energy and energy efficiency, alongside a significant reduction in the amount
required to supply fossil fuels.
What happens in the New Policies Scenario? The answer to that question is taken up in
the various chapters of this Outlook and varies by sector. In the case of oil, the analysis
in Chapter 3 starts from the observation that the volume of new conventional crude oil
resources granted a final investment decision in 2015 – at 6.5 billion barrels – was down
to a level not seen since the 1950s. The indications for 2016 are that the new resources
approved for development are still far below the average levels seen in recent years.
Given the long lead times for conventional oil and gas projects (up to five years from final
investment decision to first oil, and then another three to five years to ramp up to full
output), a dearth of new barrels being developed risks leaving a shortfall in supply once the
current overhang in production and inventories has been worked off.
Box 2.5 ⊳ Could oil investment fall short even in a 450 Scenario?

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Around one-third of the supply-demand “gap” in 2025 is caused by oil demand
growth in the New Policies Scenario, rather than declines in existing production. In a
world where demand in 2025 is lower, it follows that the level of approvals required
would also be lower. In the 450 Scenario, oil demand peaks in 2018 and by 2025 is
2.5 mb/d lower than 2015 levels (and 8.5 mb/d lower in 2025 than in the New Policies
Scenario). However, lower oil prices and gas demand in the 450 Scenario also mean
that multiple sources of production (including tight oil and natural gas liquids) are
also lower than in the New Policies Scenario, by nearly 3 mb/d. Taken together the
supply “gap” in the 450 Scenario that needs to be filled by new conventional crude oil
projects in 2025 is 10.5 mb/d, compared with 16 mb/d in the New Policies Scenario.
Following a similar logic to the New Policies Scenario, we find it is possible to fill
the 2025 “gap” in the 450 Scenario with an average annual approval rate of around
12.5 billion barrels per year, even with three years of suppressed investments. This
is an average level similar to that seen in the late 1990s, far below the level required
in the New Policies Scenario.
This highlights a few important issues. First, the transition to a low-carbon energy
system can help reduce significantly the implications of supply shortfalls resulting
from the reduced levels of upstream investment currently being witnessed. But
second, even under a scenario in which prices are low and oil demand is falling,
new project approvals and capital investment into post-peak fields are required.
The decline in production from currently producing fields far exceeds the decline in
demand in the 450 Scenario. Therefore, despite the need to begin transitioning away
from a fossil-based energy system, failing to invest in any upstream assets could lead
to major problems. Supply shortfalls, and any accompanying price instability, would
undoubtedly complicate the transition towards a lower carbon, more sustainable,
global energy system.

Chapter 2 | Overview

83

2

Based on detailed analysis of decline rates for different types of existing fields, accounting
for projects that are already approved and are anticipated to start operation in the
coming years, and building in a growth trajectory for tight oil in the United States (which
has a much shorter investment cycle than conventional projects), there is a 16 mb/d
gap opening up by 2025 that needs to be filled by new conventional project approvals in
order to meet the oil demand projection in the New Policies Scenario. One year of low
resources approved for development (i.e. 2015) can be compensated for with relative
ease by rises in subsequent years. Two years with few new conventional project decisions
(i.e. 2015 and 2016) creates a greater threat to future activity levels. But if a low level
of final investment decisions on new conventional projects were to persist into 2017 as
well, then approvals in future years would have to be consistently around historic highs
– 21 billion barrels per year – in order to avoid a supply crunch in the 2020s. This would
present a major risk of market volatility.
The downturn in natural gas markets means that they face many of the same issues as oil,
although it takes longer for the gas market to work off the current supply overhang, as
gas consumers – particularly in emerging economies – are less able to respond to a period
of low oil prices because of a range of market and infrastructure barriers, which will take
time to remove. A critical issue for a smooth adjustment to a new gas market equilibrium,
discussed in detail in Chapter 4, is when the LNG market will tighten sufficiently to require
new capacity to come online. As in the case of oil, decisions to proceed with investment
in new LNG liquefaction capacity have all but dried up in the current price environment,
although new projects in Australia and the United States – approved well before natural
gas prices started falling – are expected to start operation in 2016 and 2017. In the New
Policies Scenario, the point at which new capacity is needed to avoid a market tightening
comes in the mid-2020s, in which case the flow of final investment decisions for new LNG
projects would need to restart well before the end of the current decade.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

In the power sector, the investment that went into renewable energy power technologies in
2015 – at almost $300 billion – is broadly consistent with the annual monetary investment
that would be required in the New Policies Scenario (although, as technology costs come
down, this level of investment capital would fund a steadily larger amount of capacity).
Annual investment in power sector renewables capacity of $300 billion would even be
sufficient to meet the annual requirements in the 450 Scenario until the early 2020s, after
which point investment would need to pick up again in order to reach $530 billion per
year by the late 2030s (and a cumulative $11 trillion by 2040) (Figure 2.13). Presently,
these investment flows are responding to specific government incentives – whether feedin tariffs or competitive tenders – that offer a degree of certainty for future revenues; for
these investments, a key risk is policy volatility.
By contrast, investment into conventional fossil-fuel generation in 2015 – at $110 billion
– lies between the annual average level required in the New Policies Scenario to 2025
($115 billion) and the $85 billion required in the 450 Scenario. In competitive markets,
these are investments that should be responding to market signals today, but maintaining
84

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

the flow of new projects cannot be taken for granted, in part due to the large-scale addition
of renewables. In most countries, renewables-based producers do not recover their
investment cost from wholesale markets and, since their production depresses wholesale
prices, they cut into the investment recovery of existing conventional plants and can deter
investment in new capacity.
Figure 2.13 ⊳ Cumulative global power sector investment in the
Trillion dollars (2015)

New Policies and 450 Scenarios, 2016-2040
Power plants

12

Infrastructure
1.4 Other
0.9 Bioenergy

10
8
0.5
0.6
1.7

6
4
2

2.5 Solar PV

1.8

0.0
2.7

2.3 Hydro

0.8 CCS
1.3

NPS 450
Fossil fuels

1.4

2.1

NPS 450
Nuclear

2.4

8.1

7.2

3.9 Wind

NPS 450
Renewables

,

NPS 450
T&D

By the 2020s, the investment needs for the power sector in a
450 Scenario overtake those for fossil-fuel supply

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Notes: NPS = New Policies Scenario; 450 = 450 Scenario; T&D = transmission and distribution; Other includes
geothermal, concentrating solar power and marine.

The last major component of the investment picture is demand-side efficiency. In the New
Policies Scenario, 70% of the cumulative $23 trillion required for energy efficiency is in
the transport sector, responding to the increasing spread and stringency of fuel-economy
standards, especially for passenger vehicles. Investment in more efficient buildings and
the appliances, lighting, heating and cooling systems that they contain requires a further
25% of the total. In the 450 Scenario, tighter minimum energy performance standards
for a range of energy-using equipment, higher fuel efficiency standards, the widespread
implementation of net zero-energy buildings and other initiatives push up the cumulative
spending on efficiency improvements to $35 trillion, more than 50% higher than in the New
Policies Scenario. Measuring whether efficiency spending is on track for either of these
scenarios is complicated by the way that efficiency spending is defined, but one proxy is the
annual improvement achieved in global energy intensity. This reached 1.8% in 2015, in line
with the average annual rate of improvement in the New Policies Scenario, but well below
the 2.5% per year required in the 450 Scenario.
Chapter 2 | Overview

85

2

2.7	How might the main risks to energy security evolve over the
coming decades?
The reliability of oil and gas supply is the traditional focus of assessment of
energy security. Risks in this area remain, particularly for the Asian importers
that provide the destination for a rising share of oil and gas trade. But the
focus is shifting increasingly to electricity security, as electricity takes a higher
share of final consumption. The rise of wind and solar power is central to this
redefinition of energy security: it tempers import dependency yet creates
new challenges for power system operation. Climate change is set to
exacerbate vulnerabilities in the energy sector, not least via the impacts on
water availability.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

There are two main dimensions to the discussion of energy security. There is the shortterm threat of unexpected disruption to the supply of a key energy source – and whether
a given energy system has the flexibility to cope with such a shock. Then there are longer
term questions over the evolution of the energy system and how investment patterns,
security risks and vulnerabilities might change as a result. These two dimensions are linked:
if investment falls short (as discussed in the section 2.6), or policies or regulation fail to
keep pace with evolving risks, then there is a greater risk of sudden disruptions or shifts
in the supply-demand balance. The projections in the World Energy Outlook shed light on
some specific investment risks: they also provide some insights into the broader evolution
of energy security vulnerabilities and how these change over time in the various scenarios.
Understanding these risks is a vital first step towards the actions that are necessary to avoid
them – where possible – or the measures that are required to mitigate or withstand them.
One measure that can be traced through our projections is the diversity of the primary
energy mix among the different fuels: oil, gas, coal, nuclear, hydro, bioenergy and other
renewables. Diversity of the primary energy mix is by no means a complete indicator
of energy security: the various elements are often not substitutable and each brings a
different set of attributes and problems. Nonetheless, obtaining energy from multiple
sources can be seen as generally positive from an energy security perspective and high
reliance on a single source as a weakness. From this perspective, the shifts illustrated in
Figure 2.14 paint a generally reassuring picture. With the main exception of India in the
Current Policies Scenario (in which India becomes more reliant on coal), the energy mix
becomes more diverse between today and 2040, in all scenarios. The pace of change
varies: China sees – by far – the largest shift in the direction of greater diversification,
away from coal, underlining the scale and ambition of the transition that is underway.
The Middle East is the other region that currently has a very concentrated structure, with
oil and gas accounting for some 99% of primary consumption (their position entrenched
by fossil-fuel consumption subsidies). The transition in this case is much less dramatic.
Comparing across scenarios, the level of concentration in the energy mix in 2040 is highest
in the Current Policies Scenario. The impression of higher energy security vulnerability
in this scenario is reinforced by considering the additional investment required to meet
86

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

higher demand. Conversely, in a 450 Scenario, not only is the system more diverse, but the
overall demands on the system are much lower, because of the improvements in energy
efficiency.
Figure 2.14 ⊳ Diversity of the primary energy mix by scenario
and selected region

Diversiﬁcation Low

Moderate

High

European Union
Japan and Korea
Southeast Asia
South America
North America
Africa
China
Russia
India
Middle East

2014
2040:
NPS
450
CPS

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

Energy systems almost everywhere shift to a more diverse
mix of fuels and technologies in the coming years
Notes: NPS = New Policies Scenario; 450 = 450 Scenario; CPS = Current Policies Scenario. The indicator for diversity is
calculated using a Herfindahl-Hirschmann Index, a commonly used tool to measure market concentration in different
parts of the economy. The calculations use the share of each fuel in total primary energy demand in each scenario. Lower
values indicate a higher degree of diversity in the energy mix.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

An overall measure of diversity is useful, but an assessment of risks also needs to take into
account the direction of the shifts among the fuels and technologies and the opportunities
to switch between them. Here the situation becomes more nuanced. A common trend for
many countries and regions in the coming decades – and a desirable one in view of climate
objectives – is reduced reliance on coal. Yet, for all its environmental drawbacks, coal plays
a positive role in many energy security strategies. Coal resources are widely distributed;
once extracted, coal is relatively easy to transport and store; and the ability to switch to
coal-fired generation can offer a useful backstop in case of a disruption in another part
of the system. More limited recourse to this option can be an important consideration
for countries that are also expanding their use of natural gas (as many are, at least in the
New Policies Scenario), as it implies the need to build more safeguards and flexibility (and
storage) directly into the gas supply chain.
Despite the rise in renewables, which tends to increase the share of energy produced
domestically rather than bought or sold on the international market, global trade remains
an important component of the energy system in all our scenarios. In the New Policies
Scenario, 20% of the primary energy consumed in 2040 is traded between one of the WEO
regions, compared with 22% in 2014: only in the 450 Scenario does this share fall more
Chapter 2 | Overview

87

2

substantially, to 18%. Reliance on imported fuels – or export revenues – is not in itself an
energy security hazard, but there are potential vulnerabilities. The New Policies Scenario
shows a shift in aggregate away from coal trade (which falls slightly as a share of coal
output) and towards oil and gas, commodities for which history shows a much greater
incidence of interruptions to supply (Figure 2.15).

Thousand Mtoe

Figure 2.15 ⊳ Global fossil-fuel trade in the New Policies Scenario
5

Production
consumed locally
Trade

4

% Share of trade in
total production

3
2
1

46%

46%

20%
2014

Oil

2040

22%

2014 2040
Gas

19%

18%

2014 2040
Coal

While coal stands still, the volume of traded oil and gas increases
and the share of gas trade in total consumption moves higher

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Note: Trade shows net trade between main WEO regions, not including trade within regions.

Trade patterns for oil and gas are transformed in our projections, compared with today,
due to underlying changes in the geography of production and consumption. The rise of
production in North America turns this region into a large net provider of oil and gas in the
New Policies Scenario and rising demand means that an ever higher share of traded oil and
gas is drawn towards Asia. Of the total volume of oil and gas traded today, 50% goes to a
destination in Asia. In the New Policies Scenario in 2040, this share rises to 75%. With rising
volumes and the anticipation of higher prices, import bills also grow significantly for many
Asian importers in this scenario. China’s import bill for oil and gas reaches $680 billion
in 2040, up from an estimated $150 billion in 2015: India requires $460 billion to pay
for imported oil and gas in 2040, compared with $65 billion in 2015; the net import bill
for the ASEAN countries likewise rises sharply, from $60 billion in 2015 to $335 billion in
2040 (with oil accounting for more than 80% of the total in all cases). Beyond the financial
considerations, it is also worth recalling Churchill’s well known dictum, talking of oil, “safety
and certainty … lie in variety and variety alone”. On this point, the outlooks for oil and for
gas start to diverge.
In all scenarios, the supply of gas becomes more diverse, as new LNG suppliers emerge and,
to a lesser extent, as new pipeline routes are opened, e.g. from Russia to China. The share
88

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

of LNG in global trade rises to 53% in the New Policies Scenario, from 42%, today and this is
traded on an increasingly flexible basis, without the destination clauses and other restrictive
arrangements that still characterise much of today’s trade (see Chapter 4). The same trend
is not visible in the case of oil, for which traded supply becomes more concentrated as the
world becomes more reliant on exports from a single region, the Middle East. The degree
of concentration is highest in the 450 Scenario, based on the fact that the Middle East is
the largest source of low-cost oil, so in scenarios where demand and prices are lower, the
Middle East takes a larger share of output and trade (while simultaneously being put under
considerable pressure by the steady reduction in hydrocarbon revenue). The implication is
that reducing reliance on oil, as in the 450 Scenario, may actually heighten oil security risks
for the duration of the transition.
Another trend with strong implications for energy security is the increasing share of
electricity in final energy consumption, which rises from 18% today to around a quarter
of final consumption in 2040 in the New Policies Scenario. This rises further in deeper
decarbonisation scenarios, as electricity also starts to take a larger share of transport
demand (a shift that remains in its early stages in the New Policies Scenario) (Figure 2.16).
Electricity represents more than 40% of total supply-side investment needs of the energy
system in the New Policies Scenario (a cumulative $19 trillion out of total supply investment
of $44 trillion), due to demand growth in non-OECD countries, ageing power generation
and networks in OECD and the deployment of capital-intensive low-carbon sources almost
everywhere.
Figure 2.16 ⊳ Share of electricity in the growth in final energy consumption in
selected end-use sectors in the New Policies Scenario

Transport
2014
Growth to 2040:
Electricity
Other fuels

Buildings

Industry
1 000

2 000

3 000

4 000
Mtoe

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Electricity takes a major share of the growth in end-use consumption
in buildings and industry, while also gaining a foothold in the transport sector

Electricity security is set to feature ever more strongly in the overall energy security
debate. One of the risks highlighted by our projections is systematic under-investment
Chapter 2 | Overview

89

2

in power plants and other infrastructure, due to regulatory problems or flaws in market
design. The rapid growth of low marginal cost and variable renewables (wind and solar)
production, while wholly desirable from a climate change point of view, creates additional
challenges in this respect. As discussed in Chapter 12, high shares of wind and solar can be
integrated successfully into power systems, but this does require a policy framework that
incentivises investment to match the electricity demand profile, that allows for some of the
variability in output to be absorbed by demand-side response and storage, and provides
for a “smarter” network that operates with sufficient flexibility (a development that in
turn raises the need for vigilance on cyber security). In most systems, the production and
flexibility provided by conventional power plants also remains an essential component of
electricity security; however (as discussed in the investment section above), committing
capital to thermal generation requires a power market design that offers these plants
adequate remuneration, which at present is not always the case.
A final element of change in the energy security discussion is the way that broader global
problems, some related to energy use, intersect with and amplify challenges facing the
energy sector. Chief among these broader challenges is climate change itself, which is often
referred to as a “threat multiplier” because of the way that it widens existing fault lines
in the global system. This can have indirect impacts on energy security, perhaps by giving
an additional destabilising push to countries and regions that are already volatile, e.g. by
worsening food security in some regions, due to changes in productivity of agricultural
land. It can also have direct impacts in a variety of areas; the energy sector itself is not
immune to the physical impacts of climate change. Energy system vulnerabilities include
the sudden and destructive impact of extreme weather events that pose risks to power
plants and grids, oil and gas installations, wind power installations and other infrastructure.
Other impacts are more gradual, such as changes to heating and cooling demand, sea level
rise on coastal infrastructure and the effect of shifting weather patterns on hydropower and
water scarcity on power plants. As these last examples suggest, the intersection between
energy and water security, covered in detail in Chapter 9, is of particular consequence for
the future (Spotlight).

S P O T L I G H T

© OECD/IEA, 2016

How does water fit into the energy mix?
In a ranking of potential global risks conducted by the World Economic Forum in 2016,
three of the top-five concerned either energy (a failure of climate change mitigation
and adaptation, or a severe energy price shock) or water (water crises). In practice,
energy and water are closely interrelated. Water is essential for all phases of energy
production, from fossil fuels to biofuels and power plants: energy is vital for a range of
water processes, including water distribution, wastewater treatment and desalination.
All of the weaknesses in the global energy system, whether related to energy access,
energy security or the response to climate change, can be exacerbated by changes in

90

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

water availability. All of the fault lines in global water supply can be widened by failures
on the energy side.
Chapter 9 in WEO-2016 shows how the interdependencies between energy and water
are set to deepen in the coming decades. The analysis provides a first systematic global
estimate for the amount of energy used to supply water to consumers, including
the electricity used to extract, distribute and treat water and wastewater, and the
thermal energy used for irrigation pumps and desalination plants. Over the period
to 2040, the amount of energy used for these purposes is projected to more than
double as desalination capacity rises sharply in the Middle East and North Africa and as
demand for wastewater treatment (and higher levels of treatment) grows, especially
in emerging economies. The energy sector also becomes thirstier over the period to
2040: there is a switch to advanced cooling technologies that withdraw less water,
but consume more (i.e. water that is withdrawn but not returned to a source), while
greater deployment of nuclear power increases both withdrawal and consumption
levels, and an increase in biofuels demand pushes up water use from primary energy
production. Some technologies, such as wind and solar PV, require very little water; but
the more a decarbonisation pathway relies on biofuels production, the deployment
of concentrating solar power, carbon capture or nuclear power, the more water it
consumes. As a result, despite lower energy demand, water consumption in 2040 in a
450 Scenario is slightly higher than in the New Policies Scenario.
Figure 2.17 ⊳ Global energy use in the water sector and water use
in the energy sector in the New Policies Scenario

Water sector energy consumption

Supply

+130%

2014

Wastewater
treatment

2040
50

100

150

200

250

Energy sector water consumption

300
Mtoe

Primary energy
production

+59%

2014

Alternative water
sources

Power
2040
20

40

60

80
bcm

© OECD/IEA, 2016

In the coming decades, the water consumed by the energy sector rises sharply,
as does the energy consumed by the water sector
Notes: Supply includes extraction, water treatment, distribution and water transfer. Alternative water sources
include desalination and re-use.

Chapter 2 | Overview

91

2

2.8

Are we on the path to achieving universal access to energy?
The target to achieve universal access to energy by 2030 is an ambitious
one, with 1.2 billion people still without access to electricity today and
2.7 billion people without clean cooking facilities. Momentum is building
behind national and international efforts in both these areas, but despite the
anticipated progress (particularly with electrification), we project that some
780 million people remain without electricity in 2030 and that the number
continuing to rely on the traditional use of solid biomass for cooking falls by
less than 15%, to 2.3 billion.

Access to modern forms of energy is a critical enabler of human development; it occupies
a priority place in national policymaking in countries where universal access has yet to
be achieved and on the international development agenda. Efforts to promote access
received a boost in 2015 with the adoption of the UN Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs), which include in Goal 7 (SDG 7), the aim to ensure universal access to affordable,
reliable, sustainable and modern energy services, with a target date of 2030. The Addis
Ababa Action Agenda, agreed earlier in 2015, covered the need to channel finance for the
sustainable development agenda. The third crucial accord reached during the year was the
Paris Agreement, which acknowledges the need to promote universal access to sustainable
energy, particularly in Africa.4
Table 2.5 ⊳ Population without access to modern energy services in the
New Policies Scenario (million people)
Without access to electricity
Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa
Developing Asia

Without access to clean cooking facilities

2014

2030

2040

2014

2030

634

619

489

793

823

2040
708

633

619

489

792

823

708

512

166

47

1 875

1 458

1 081

China

0

0

0

453

244

175

India

244

56

0

819

675

450
52

Latin America

22

0

0

65

56

Middle East

18

0

0

8

8

7

1 186

784

536

2 742

2 345

1 849

World

Sources: IEA and WHO (World Health Organisation) databases.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

The size of the remaining task is huge (Table 2.5). Estimates show a huge deficit in access to
energy for the world’s poorest people. An estimated 1.2 billion people, or 16% of the world’s
population, still lacked access to electricity in 2014. However, this number represents a
4. Other initiatives launched over the last year include a G20 plan for enhancing energy access in Asia and the Pacific,
building on the G20 Energy Access Action Plan for sub-Saharan Africa. The African Development Bank in September 2015
launched an initiative, “A New Deal on Energy for Africa”, aiming to mobilise support and finance to achieve universal
access to energy in Africa by 2025.
92

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

decrease of 15 million people compared with the previous year, despite an increase in
the global population, showing the ambition and progress achieved in many countries.5
Sub-Saharan Africa remains the region with the greatest concentration of energy poverty,
with 65% of the population, 633 million people, lacking access to electricity (a reduction of
less than 1% compared with the estimate for 2013) (Figure 2.18). In India, the electrification
rate has reached 81%, an almost doubling of the 43% rate of electricity access in 2000,
and access is a major political priority, with the current government pledging universal
“24x7” power for all by 2022 (with ambitions for reaching this target before 2020). A major
milestone in electricity access was reached at the end of 2015, with the announcement
by the government that China had achieved universal electricity access, bringing an end
to the largest national electrification programme in history. However, efforts to improve
access should not stop with an electricity connection as it is no guarantee of reliable and
affordable supply: curtailment caused by inadequate infrastructure and power supply is
very common in many parts of the developing world, taking a large economic toll.
Figure 2.18 ⊳ Evolution of access to clean cooking and to electricity
by selected region in the New Policies Scenario

Access to clean cooking

100%

Access to electricity

80%
60%
40%
20%
0

20
40
Thousand dollars of GDP per capita (2015)

2000 2014 2030

Sub-Saharan Africa
Latin America

0

20
40
Thousand dollars of GDP per capita (2015)
China
India

Indonesia
World

Projected progress in improving access to clean cooking lags
behind access to electricity in the New Policies Scenario

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Access to clean cooking receives far less attention than electrification and in many ways
is more difficult to achieve. Progress has not been keeping pace with population growth:
latest estimates show that 2.7 billion people, almost 40% of the global population, still
rely on the traditional use of biomass for cooking, an increase from the previous estimate
5. Year-on-year progress in electricity access is difficult to measure due to changes in sources. However, progress is clear:
had the rate of electricity access remained unchanged from the previous estimate for 2013, population growth would
have implied that 27 million additional people would have been without electricity access in 2014.

Chapter 2 | Overview

93

2

in WEO-2015 by around 20 million people.6 Half of the global population that lacks clean
cooking access lives in Asia, particularly India, where 63% of the population lack access
to clean cooking (30% of the global total). The Indian government has pledged to give
free LPG connections to 50 million identified poor rural households by 2019, which,
if achieved, would reduce this access deficit significantly. The problem is also acute in
sub-Saharan Africa, where more than 80% of the population cooks with biomass using
traditional methods, yet there are far fewer initiatives for clean cooking than for electricity,
even though interventions strongly benefit the poorest in society (EUEI PDF, 2016). The
smoky environments caused by reliance on solid biomass in households are a major health
hazard, particularly for the women and children that have the highest exposure (and in the
case of younger children, also the highest vulnerability) to fine particulate matter in the air.
The outlook for access to electricity and clean cooking shows that the world is far from
being on track to meeting the SDG 7 goal of achieving universal access to modern energy by
2030.7 In the New Policies Scenario, more than 780 million people are projected to remain
without access to electricity in 2030 and 540 million still in 2040. To an extent, these figures
disguise the progress that is made: population growth means that around one billion
people gain electricity access in both Africa and Asia in 2040 compared with today, with
nearly three-quarters of this growth occurring in cities. An expanding centralised electricity
grid provides nearly two-thirds of electricity generated for additional access in 2040, but
decentralised solutions, particularly from renewables, are critical in providing access to
remote rural areas of many countries (see Chapter 10, Spotlight). But progress is uneven
and the remaining population without electricity access becomes more concentrated in
sub-Saharan Africa (accounting for more than 90% of the global total without electricity
access in 2040, up from just over half today). At present, per-capita electricity consumption
in sub-Saharan Africa, excluding South Africa, is only 6% of the world’s average and only
grows to 14% in 2040 over the Outlook. The rural population is the most disadvantaged,
with 95% of the population without access concentrated in rural areas in 2040, from around
80% today. Efforts are, however, gathering momentum in sub-Saharan Africa: Power Africa,
a US government initiative, has this year published a roadmap to add 60 million new
electricity connections by 2030 (USAID, 2016).

© OECD/IEA, 2016

The projection for access to clean cooking facilities shows less progress than in the case
of electrification: the number of people without access decreases by only 200 million by
2030, a reduction of 14%, as the adoption of clean cooking facilities struggles to keep pace
with population growth in many of the countries concerned. Of those that gain access,
three-quarters do so via LPG cookstoves, mainly in urban areas because of the relative ease
of establishing fuel supply networks. In rural areas, the most common route to access is via
6. While “access to clean cooking” in this context refers to the use of fuels for cooking other than solid biomass used
in a traditional manner, the SDG Indicator 7.1.2 refers to the “proportion of population with primary reliance on clean
fuels and technology” for lighting and cooking, which excludes the use of unprocessed coal and kerosene. This indicator
is monitored by the World Health Organization and amounted to about 3 billion in 2014.
7. A detailed description of the methodology underpinning the projections for energy access can be found at:
www.worldenergyoutlook.org/resources/energydevelopment/.
94

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

improved biomass cookstoves: solid biomass remains a major fuel for residential use in our
projections (Figure 2.19). Developing countries in Asia, despite reaching almost universal
electrification, still have more than 1.5 billion people without clean cooking access in 2030,
over one-third of the population at that time. Even in China, where universal electrification
is already complete, around 450 million people still rely on the traditional use of biomass
for cooking today and this number only falls to 250 million people in 2030. In sub-Saharan
Africa, the switch is not rapid enough to keep up with the rise in population, and so the
number of people without access increases by 2030, to over 800 million, before starting a
gradual decline by 2040.
Figure 2.19 ⊳ Share of solid biomass in residential energy use by selected
region in the New Policies Scenario

100%

2014
2040

80%
60%
40%
20%

Africa

India

China

Indonesia

Other Asia

Latin
America

World

© OECD/IEA, 2016

The share of solid biomass in residential energy use declines
in the New Policies Scenario, but remains widespread

Dedicated policies to promote access are essential to break the vicious cycle of energy
poverty, in which growth in incomes and living standards are severely hindered by a lack
of modern energy services, while at the same time low incomes and poor investment are
a fundamental barrier to increasing access. This is most evident in sub-Saharan Africa,
where multiple developmental and environmental challenges are rooted in poverty and
closely linked to a lack of access to modern energy services. The potential for policy to
make a difference can be seen in multiple ways; it is even clear by looking at the way that
concerted policy action in some countries has accelerated progress with access beyond
the pace projected in the World Energy Outlook in 2004 (Box 2.6). Technology can also be
a major enabler of effective policymaking and improvement on the ground: decentralised
renewable energy is providing an increasingly viable and affordable way to close the access
gap in rural areas, particularly for remote settlements far from the existing grid.

Chapter 2 | Overview

95

2

Box 2.6 ⊳ Looking back at looking ahead: how did previous Outlooks see the
access situation today?

The New Policies Scenario evolves each year with the changing policy landscape.
Revisiting the access scenarios from WEO-2004 (IEA, 2004) reinforces two messages
made in this analysis (Figure 2.20). There is an imbalance in global action between
electricity access, where there has been more rapid progress, and access to clean
cooking. And countries can make a major difference with good policy choices and
political will. From the base-year of 2002, when an estimated 73% of the global
population had access to electricity, the expectation in WEO-2004 – based on policies
in place at the time – was that this percentage would rise to 78% by 2014. The latest
estimate suggests that around 84% of the world’s population had access to electricity
in 2014, with improvement largely due to a successful push for electrification in India
over the years. Projections in WEO-2004 suggested that access to electricity in India
might rise from 44% in 2002 towards 60% by 2014: in practice, the data show that
more than 80% had electricity in 2014, testament to a strong policy drive by federal
and state governments. However, in Africa, where enabling conditions did not change
as starkly over the decade, the 2004 projections for access to electricity unfortunately
reflect the current reality.
In general, improvements in access to clean cooking have proceeded in line with the
somewhat pessimistic projection made twelve years ago. In contrast with the progress
made in electricity access, India has achieved less in the intervening period with clean
cooking than projected, although progress in Africa and in China has been slightly
more rapid.
Figure 2.20 ⊳ Comparison of WEO-2004 projections for energy access
with estimates for 2014

100%

Access to electricity, 2014

Access to clean cooking, 2014

80%
60%
40%
20%

© OECD/IEA, 2016

World

India
Africa
As projected in WEO-2004

World

India
Africa
Latest estimate

China

In the case of electricity, stronger policies have produced faster improvements
than projected in WEO-2004; for clean cooking, the picture is more mixed

96

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

2.9	Changing places: is global spending on energy
subsidies shifting from fossil fuels and in favour of
renewable energy sources?

2

The fall in oil prices has provided an opportunity and incentive for energy
pricing reform and brought the overall estimate for fossil-fuel subsidies
down to $325 billion in 2015, from close to $500 billion in 2014. Subsidies to
renewable energy rose in 2015 towards $150 billion, mostly in the power
sector, and the effectiveness of the subsidies has also been increasing, with
reductions in technology costs. Whether this shift continues depends on the
resolve of governments to persist with pricing reform even once fossil-fuel
prices start to rise; and on the speed at which renewable energy projects
become economically competitive without any state support.

Fossil-fuel subsidies distort energy markets, promoting inefficient use of energy and
increasing energy-related CO2 emissions. They are a roadblock on the way to a cleaner and
more efficient energy future. Their value, in terms of actual fiscal transfers to consumers
and the opportunity cost of foregone revenue, has consistently dwarfed the amounts
allocated by governments to subsidies for renewable energy: in 2014, for example, fossilfuel consumption subsidies of almost $500 billion were more than three-times higher
than renewables subsidies of some $140 billion (consisting of $114 billion for non-hydro
renewables for power generation and $24 billion for other sectors, notably biofuels).8
A confluence of developments has opened up an opportunity to change this dynamic. On
the renewables side, subsidies supporting the deployment of non-hydro renewables for
power rose again to an estimated $120 billion in 2015, supplemented by nearly $30 billion
supporting deployment of renewables in transport and other end-uses. As well as
supporting existing projects in the power sector, these subsidies helped to facilitate capital
investment of $230 billion and more than 120 GW of new non-hydro renewables capacity.
Cost reductions mean that this spending on subsidies and new investment projects is
progressively delivering more capacity per dollar spent. Subsidies increased by around 6%
in 2015, but installed renewables capacity more quickly, by around 8%.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

At the same time, the plunge in oil prices since 2014 has added to the impetus behind
the reform of fossil-fuel subsidies – amplifying the political momentum created by
commitments made in the G20, in the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) and
elsewhere (Table 2.6). Among net importers, pressure to phase out subsidies had built up
during the period of high oil prices from 2011-2014 and the lower oil prices presented an
opportunity to follow through as subsidy reform could be achieved without having a major
upward impact on prices or inflation. Indonesia, for example, cut subsidies for both gasoline
and diesel in 2015, with the complete removal of the latter under further consideration.
The new dynamic in 2015-2016 was in the main oil and gas producing nations, where
8. The IEA uses a price-gap methodology to estimate fossil-fuel subsidies: the price gap is the amount by which the average
final consumer price for a given fuel falls short of its reference price, which corresponds to the full cost of supply or, where
appropriate, the international market price, adjusted for the costs of transportation and distribution, and value-added tax.

Chapter 2 | Overview

97

subsidies are concentrated in practice. Here the loss of hydrocarbon revenue has created
huge pressure for fiscal consolidation, with cuts to wasteful fuel subsidies an obvious way
to relieve the strain on budgets.
Table 2.6 ⊳ Recent fossil-fuel subsidy reforms in selected countries
Main fuels subsidised

Algeria
Angola
Argentina

Ecuador
India
Indonesia

Iran
Nigeria
Oman

Qatar
Saudi
Arabia

Trinidad
and Tobago
Tunisia
Thailand

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Ukraine
Venezuela

Recent developments

Gasoline, diesel, natural
gas, electricity
Kerosene, electricity

In January 2016, increased prices of gasoline by 34% and
diesel by 37%. Also increased prices of electricity and gas.
Ended subsidies for gasoline in April 2015 and for diesel in
January 2016.
Natural gas, electricity,
In January, March and April 2016, increased prices of gasoline
LPG
and diesel by 6% and in May 2016 by 10%. In April 2016,
increased prices of natural gas for residential, industry,
transport, and electricity by reducing subsidies.
Gasoline, diesel
In October 2015, announced elimination of subsidies for jet
fuel, fuel oil, LPG and diesel for large industrial consumers.
Kerosene, LPG, natural
In April 2016, introduced direct cash transfer scheme for
gas, electricity
residential kerosene consumers and launched a programme
to progressively raise kerosene prices, starting in July 2016.
Electricity, diesel
In January 2016, announced plans to reform electricity
subsidies to be better targeted to poor and vulnerable
households. In March 2016, announced a plan to remove
subsidies for diesel.
Gasoline, diesel, kerosene, In May 2016, cabinet approved the removal of gasoline quota
LPG, natural gas,
for public and private passenger vehicles by September.
electricity
Gasoline, kerosene
In May 2016, increased a price cap for gasoline by 68% to
NGN 145 per litre ($0.73).
Gasoline, diesel,
In January 2016, increased prices of premium gasoline (RON
95) by 33 % to OMR 0.160 ($0.42) per litre and regular
natural gas, electricity
gasoline (RON 90) by 23% to OMR 0.140 ($0.36) per litre. The
price of diesel was also raised 9.6% to OMR 0.160 ($0.42) per
litre.
Gasoline, diesel,
In January 2016, increased prices of gasoline around onethird. In May 2016, started adjusting the prices of gasoline
natural gas, electricity
and diesel to global market prices.
Gasoline, diesel,
In December 2015, announced numerous price hikes,
kerosene, natural gas,
including gasoline, natural gas and electricity. Increased prices
of premium gasoline (RON 95) by 50% to SAR 0.9 ($0.24) per
electricity
litre and regular gasoline (RON 91) by two-thirds to SAR 0.75
($0.20) per litre, and also increased prices of electricity.
Gasoline, diesel,
In September 2015, increased prices of gasoline and diesel. In
electricity
April 2016, announced a budget that includes a decrease of
subsidies for gasoline and diesel.
Gasoline, diesel,
In April 2016, announced to link fuel prices to market prices.
electricity, LPG, kerosene
LPG, natural gas,
In January 2016, announced to deregulate prices for CNG
electricity
starting in July.
Natural gas, electricity
In April 2016, introduced a market-based price for natural
gas, together with targeted social support for residential
consumers.
Gasoline, diesel, natural
In February 2016, increased prices of premium gasoline by
60-times to VEF 6.0 ($0.6) per litre, and regular gasoline by
gas, electricity
14-times to VEF 1.0 ($0.1).

Notes: LPG = liquefied petroleum gas; CNG = compressed natural gas.
98

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

The value of global fossil-fuel consumption subsidies in 2015 is estimated at $325 billion,
much lower than the estimate for 2014, which was close to $500 billion (Figure 2.21).9 The
decrease in the value largely reflects lower international energy prices of subsidised fuels
since mid-2014, as the gap between international benchmark and end-user prices is closed
by decreased international prices of energy, but it also incorporates the impact of pricing
reform.10 Of the total, oil subsidies accounted for 44% of the total ($145 billion, covering
an estimated 11% of global oil consumption), followed by electricity subsidies estimated
at just over $100 billion (covering 17% of global electricity use). Natural gas subsidies were
also significant, amounting to nearly $80 billion (affecting the price paid for 25% of gas
consumption). Coal subsides are relatively small, at $1 billion in 2015.
Figure 2.21 ⊳ Estimates for global fossil-fuel consumption subsidies
Billion dollars

and subsidies for renewables

600

Fossil fuels
Renewables

500
400
300
200
100
2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

The drop in fossil-fuel prices and in the value of subsidies has raised prospects for reform;
the fall in technology costs has boosted the effectiveness of subsidies for renewables

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Although subsidies to fossil fuels remain well above those to renewables, the gap has
narrowed substantially. In 2008, the ratio was more than 10:1, but in 2015 it was closer
to 2:1. Some countries saw both a fall in fossil-fuel subsidies and an increase on the
renewables side. India is a good example: the deregulation of diesel prices in late 2014,
taking advantage of the fall in the oil price, meant that all oil-based transport fuels are
now free of subsidy. As a result India’s total subsidy bill fell by half from $38 billion in 2014
to around $19 billion in 2015. At the same time, India has been stepping up its support
to renewables, its estimated subsidy in this area rising by nearly 40% to exceed 2 billion
9. The WEO estimate covers subsidies to fossil fuels consumed by end-users (households, industries and businesses) and
subsidies to the consumption of electricity generated by fossil fuels.
10. See www.worldenergyoutlook.org/resources/energysubsidies for full details of the IEA’s methodology for
estimating subsidies.

Chapter 2 | Overview

99

2

in 2015 as it pushes to attain its target of 175 GW of renewables capacity (excluding large
hydropower) by 2022 from a current level of less than 40 GW.
But, by and large, there is little overlap between the countries that provide the largest
subsidies to renewables and those that subsidise fossil fuels. Among the former are the
European Union, which accounts for just over half the estimated global subsidies to
renewables for power (more than $60 billion), followed by the United States ($18 billion),
China (almost $17 billion) and Japan ($10.5 billion). Meanwhile, the largest sources of
subsidies to fossil fuels are Iran, with 16% of the total ($52 billion), Saudi Arabia ($49 billion),
Russia ($30 billion) and Venezuela ($20 billion).
The outlook for subsidies, both for fossil fuels and renewables, depends on the way that
fossil fuel prices, technology costs and government policies evolve. On the fossil-fuel side,
pricing reform has gained momentum since 2014 – gains that are assumed to be maintained
in the New Policies Scenario.11 But there is always a risk – especially if “reformed” pricing
mechanisms remain non-transparent – that governments come under pressure, as and
when oil prices rise, to re-introduce price controls. The arguments are typically made on
social grounds, to protect vulnerable consumers, even though subsidising end-user prices
is a very inefficient way of pursuing social objectives: in practice, the lion’s share of the
benefits go to wealthier segments of the population that consume more of the subsidised
product. A critical uncertainty is whether the impetus behind pricing reform in the Middle
East is maintained, or whether it dissipates once fiscal pressures ease (Box 2.7).

© OECD/IEA, 2016

In the case of subsidies to renewables (examined in detail in Chapter 11), these continue
to be necessary to incentivise investment in renewables over fossil-fuel alternatives, for
as long as markets fail to reflect the environmental and health costs associated with the
emissions of CO2 and other pollutants. But as technology costs come down and electricity
and CO2 prices increase in several markets, more and more new renewable energy
projects become economically competitive without any state support: in India, solar PV
is competitive without subsidies well before 2030; for the world as a whole, most new
renewables-based generation in 2040 does not require subsidies. The value of the subsidies
paid to all forms of renewable energy peaks at $240 billion in 2030 in the New Policies
Scenario and then falls back to $200 billion by 2040, remaining well below the today’s value
for fossil-fuel consumption subsidies. The subsidy per unit of renewables-based electricity
generation falls dramatically: subsidies to renewable-based generation rise by some 30%
over the period to 2040, yet the electricity generated by non-hydro renewables increases
by a factor of five over the same period. In a 450 Scenario, deployment of renewables is
much higher, but more widespread pricing of carbon and other emissions and a faster pace
of cost reductions (linked to higher deployment) means that the cumulative subsidy bill is
only around 15% higher than in the New Policies Scenario.

11. In the New Policies Scenario, net-importing countries and regions phase out fossil-fuel subsidies completely within
ten years, but pricing reform in net-exporting countries is assumed only where there is a specific commitment and
timetable for a phase-out.
100

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

Box 2.7 ⊳ Are energy price reforms in the Middle East here to stay?

Oil-reliant economies in the Middle East have been hit hard by the fall in the oil price since
2014. Oil export receipts fell by an estimated $330 billion in 2015 and the deterioration
in fiscal balances forced countries to borrow or draw down financial reserves (where
available), and to cut spending where possible. Our estimate of the value of fossil-fuel
subsidies in the Middle East was around $130 billion in 2015, mostly foregone revenue
from pricing fuels well below their international market value, and governments across
the region have looked to recoup at least part of this value with pricing reforms. This
was visible not only in countries such as Iran – where subsidy reduction has long been
a stated priority – but also in the countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council such as the
United Arab Emirates (UAE), Kuwait, Qatar and Saudi Arabia.12

Changes to pricing have been sharp, albeit from a low base. In August 2015, the UAE
fully liberalised its gasoline and diesel prices, introducing a pricing mechanism where
domestic prices are set on a monthly basis and are directly linked to international
prices. In Saudi Arabia, prices for most fuels went up: premium gasoline by 50% (to
$0.24/litre), diesel for industry by similar amount (to $14 per barrel); gas for power
generation by 67% (to $1.25 per million British thermal units). Pricing reform has been
the product of divergent circumstances across the region. To the extent that it is just
a response to fiscal pressures, the reform is liable to be reversed once that pressure
is relieved. But if it is part of a broad, long-term reform and diversification strategy
(such as Saudi Arabia’s Vision 2030, adopted in April 2016) and accompanied by other
measures such as energy efficiency (to limit the impact on household and company
budgets), then the chances of longevity rise sharply.

2.10	Does energy reform point a new way forward for Mexico? 13
Mexico’s reform seeks to revive an ailing energy sector by opening up the
oil, gas and electricity sectors to new investment and technology, creating
a new competitive environment for incumbents PEMEX and CFE. In our
projections, it takes time for new projects to turn around the slide in oil output
and to develop Mexico’s large, untapped wind and solar resources; but the
projected energy, economic and environmental outcomes suggest there
can be a large positive return on a sustained reform effort.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Mexico’s 2013 announcement of wide-ranging economic reforms, including both in
upstream oil and gas and in the power sector, is an historic attempt to revitalise the energy
sector. Despite large oil resources, Mexico’s production has been falling for more than a

12. Most of the reforms to GCC fuel and electricity end-user prices were implemented only in 2016 and so did not affect
2015 average end-use prices, upon which our latest subsidy calculations are based.
13. This analysis is drawn from Mexico Energy Outlook: World Energy Outlook Special Report (IEA, 2016c).

Chapter 2 | Overview

101

2

decade: bringing in new investment and technology, by breaking the upstream monopoly
of Petroleos Mexicanos (PEMEX), was seen as the way to reverse this trend. Likewise,
the introduc on of new players into the power sector and restructuring the incumbent
Comisión Federal de Electricidad (CFE) was seen as vital to ensure cost-eﬃcient investment
into both tradi onal and lower carbon sources of electricity and to bolster the overall
economic outlook.
Total primary energy demand in Mexico has grown by a quarter and electricity consump on
by half since 2000, but per-capita energy use is s ll less than 40% of the OECD average,
leaving strong poten al for further growth. The energy mix is dominated by fossil fuels,
with oil accoun ng for around half of the total – a share higher than in the highly oildependent Middle East. Yet Mexico’s long-standing posi on as one of the world’s major oil
producers and exporters has been weakened in recent years, with produc on declining by
over 1 mb/d since 2004. This fall in output is linked to a shor all in the funds available to
PEMEX for capital expenditure to slow declines in mature fields or to develop new ones.
Gas output has also been in decline (most of the produc on is associated with oil) and
imports from the United States now meet around 40% of gas demand.

mb/d

Figure 2.22 ⊳ Oil production in Mexico in the New Policies Scenario
4

3

Deep water

2

Shallow water
Onshore Ɵght oil

1
Onshore convenƟonal

2015

2020

2025

2030

2035

Decline from
exisƟng Įelds
2040

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Mexico’s oil output gets back on a rising path, but it takes
time for new projects to offset declines in existing fields

A series of bid rounds that began in 2015 is opening the upstream oil and gas sectors to
private investment and technology, leaving PEMEX to focus its resources and exper se
on a narrower range of projects – either alone or in new joint ventures. Eﬀorts to turn
Mexico’s oil fortunes around require tackling three dis nct sets of challenges. The first
relates to shallow water produc on in the Gulf of Mexico, the tradi onal mainstay of the
country’s output but one that requires renewed eﬀorts to improve recovery and reduce
field declines in mature areas, alongside investment to e in new satellite fields to exis ng
102

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

infrastructure. Deepwater production is the new frontier for Mexico and an area where
PEMEX has less experience: international players are likely to take a lead. There are also
some promising onshore resources, including significant tight oil potential and the huge,
but technically difficult Chicontepec Basin. The upstream reforms were initially conceived
when prices were high: lower oil prices have complicated, but not derailed, the process. It
nonetheless takes some time for new investment projects to start operation, meaning that
Mexico’s oil production continues to fall back in the near term. Projected crude oil output
bottoms out at under 2 mb/d towards 2020 and then starts to recover. By 2040, crude oil
output returns to 2.4 mb/d, but adding in natural gas liquids and, by then, some tight oil
takes total oil output in 2040 up to 3.4 mb/d (Figure 2.22).
In the electricity sector, there are likewise three vectors for change. One that is already
well underway is fuel switching: oil has traditionally played a major role as a fuel for power
generation, but is rapidly losing ground to natural gas whose cost advantage has been
reinforced by the shale gas boom in the United States (Figure 2.23). The unbundling of CFE and
a further opening of the power sector to private participation play a major role in mobilising
the $10 billion per year that Mexico needs to upgrade the network and to keep pace with
electricity demand that grows by 85% to 2040. Long-term auctions for energy, capacity and
clean energy certificates provide an entry point for new players on a competitive basis and
a cost-effective way to bring low-carbon generation into the mix: the first two auctions for
new power supply, held in 2016, demonstrated strong readiness to invest in new solar and
wind capacity. As well, investment in strengthening the grid and reducing Mexico’s very high
current losses in the transmission and distribution system, allied to efficiency gains on the
retail side, all help to moderate the costs of electricity supply.

TWh

Figure 2.23 ⊳ Power generation mix in Mexico in the New Policies Scenario
600

historical

projected

Other*
Solar PV
Geothermal
Wind

500
400

Hydro
Nuclear

300
200

Gas
100

© OECD/IEA, 2016

2000

2010

2020

2030

Oil
Coal
2040

The power generation mix in Mexico becomes steadily
more diverse and much less carbon-intensive
Note: Other include bioenergy and concentrating solar power.

Chapter 2 | Overview

103

2

Box 2.8 ⊳ Assessing the value of change: No Reform Case14

The pathway for Mexico projected in the New Policies Scenario is determined in
large measure by the country’s energy reforms. But what would the trajectory look
like in their absence? To answer this question, a “No Reform Case” posits an outlook
for Mexico in which none of the major reforms since 2013 are in place, so the state
monopoly is maintained in oil and gas and there is no additional private participation
or restructuring in the electricity sector.
Differences in the volume and type of investment going into the energy sector are the
main reason for divergences between the New Policies Scenario and the No Reform
Case (Figure 2.24). The historic relationship between oil revenue and PEMEX upstream
spending was used to derive an outlook for upstream investment: in the context of
today’s continued declines in output, this severely limits Mexico’s capacity to fund
expansion and enhanced recovery projects in legacy fields, and delays the start of
technically challenging deepwater and tight oil development projects. As a result, by
2040, oil production is some 1 mb/d lower than in the New Policies Scenario. In the
power sector, without the same efficiency gains made in networks and other parts
of the system in the New Policies Scenario, the costs of electricity supply are higher.
Without specific policies to increase the role of clean energy, lower deployment of
renewables leaves Mexico well short of its clean energy targets. The net impact in
the No Reform Case is to leave Mexico’s economy 4% smaller in 2040 than in the New
Policies Scenario.14
Figure 2.24 ⊳ Selected indicators for Mexico in the No Reform Case
compared with the New Policies Scenario, 2040
GDP
Household consumption
-5%

-4%

-3%

-2%

-1%

0%
Oil production
Oil export revenue

-50%

-40%

-30%

-20%

-10%

0%

10%

20%

Industrial electricity price

© OECD/IEA, 2016

In a No Reform Case, lower investment in upstream and power is felt
in 2040 across the energy sector and the wider economy

14. This differential was calculated by coupling the results of the IEA’s World Energy Model with the OECD’s computable
general equilibrium model, ENV-LINKAGES.
104

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

The result of these changes is a steady increase in generation capacity – more than half
of which is renewables – and not just a halving in the CO2 emissions intensity of power
generation (from more than 450 g CO2/kWh in 2014 to 220 g CO2/kWh in 2040,) but also
an absolute decline in power sector emissions over the Outlook period. A distinguishing
feature of Mexico’s power reform is that clean energy has been integrated into the reform
package from the outset, helping to achieve the target (that is written into the Energy
Transition Law) to have 35% of electricity generation sourced from clean energy by 2024.
A steady increase in the price of natural gas exerts some upward pressure on average
generation costs, but this is counter-balanced by efficiency gains and lower network losses:
industrial electricity prices decrease in real terms over the period to 2040 – one of the
many outcomes in the New Policies Scenario that would be difficult to anticipate in the
absence of reform (Box 2.8).

© OECD/IEA, 2016

An increasingly integrated North American energy market plays an important role in
Mexico’s energy outlook. Of the increase in primary energy demand, 70% comes from
natural gas, much of it – at least in the first half of the projection period – sourced from
the United States. The ample US refinery capacity along the Gulf Coast is well suited to
Mexico’s heavier crudes and provides a ready source of imported oil products. The current
market environment, in which imported energy is readily and cheaply available, helps to
offset the economic impact of lower hydrocarbon revenues (which remaining an important
pillar of fiscal revenue, even if the government is taking steps to diminish this reliance). In
the case of natural gas, it also lessens the incentive for PEMEX or other operators (most
likely US based or international majors) to invest in Mexico’s large shale gas resources in
the near to medium term; in our projections, there is some initial activity in Mexico’s northeastern Burgos Basin, but larger scale shale development is postponed until the latter part
of the 2020s, by which time rising gas prices in the United States have strengthened the
economic case for natural gas projects in Mexico.

Chapter 2 | Overview

105

2

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Chapter 3
Oil market outlook
What’s past is prologue
Highlights

• The pledges made as part of the Paris Agreement do not induce a peak in oil demand
before 2040 in the New Policies Scenario. The difficulty of finding alternatives to oil
in road freight, aviation and petrochemicals means that, up to 2040, the growth in
these three sectors alone is greater than the growth in global oil demand. There are
also marked changes in the geography of demand: India becomes the leading source
of future growth, while China overtakes the United States to become the single
largest consuming country in the early 2030s.

• The global stock of electric cars rises rapidly in the New Policies Scenario, from
1.3 million in 2015 to over 30 million by 2025 and more than 150 million by 2040,
displacing 1.3 mb/d of oil. Battery costs decline to less than half today’s level, but the
time required to recoup the additional investment cost of electric cars, compared
with conventional cars, constrains more rapid deployment. Additional policy support
could, however, lead to higher deployment: in the 450 Scenario, the global stock
exceeds 710 million in 2040, displacing more than 6 mb/d of oil demand.

• Tight oil production in the United States has been more resilient to the drop in
oil prices than anticipated by many. The reaction to any price rebound will not be
immediate. US tight oil production in the New Policies Scenario reaches a high point
in the late-2020s at just over 6 mb/d. Helped by greater fuel efficiency and fuel
switching, the United States all but eliminates net imports of oil by 2040.

• Declines in production from existing conventional crude oil fields are equivalent to
losing the current oil output of Iraq from the global balance every two years, providing
a powerful underlying stimulus for the current rebalancing of the oil market. Yet there
is also the risk of an over-correction: the volume of conventional crude oil resources
receiving development approval in 2015 fell to its lowest level since the 1950s and
the data for 2016 show no sign of a rebound. There is scope to recover from one or
two years of suppressed project approvals, but with the level of demand growth seen
in the New Policies Scenario, prolonging this into 2017 or beyond could lead to more
volatile oil prices and a new boom-and-bust cycle for the industry.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

• There is no reason to assume widespread stranding of upstream assets for oil,
even in a drive to decarbonise the energy sector, as in the 450 Scenario, provided
governments pursue unambiguous policies to that end. Investment in oil and gas,
albeit at reduced pace, remains an essential component of an orderly transition to
a low-carbon future. But abrupt changes to climate policymaking or misjudgements
of future oil demand by the oil industry could lead to more severe financial losses.

Chapter 3 | Oil market outlook

107

3.1 Recent market and policy developments
The fallout of the crash in oil prices, instability in many producing states and the re-entry
of Iran to the international stage, have all contributed to a tumultuous time for oil markets
since last year’s World Energy Outlook (WEO-2015). Key events behind the fall in prices
in 2014 were the extraordinary rise of tight oil production in the United States and the
decision by key members of Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) to
refrain from constraining output to support oil prices. The growth of tight oil production has
now stalled, but the full implications of recent developments will continue to ripple over
markets over a long period. Investment in upstream oil and gas projects, which reached an
historic high of $780 billion in 2014, fell by almost $200 billion in 2015 and is anticipated to
fall by a further $140 billion in 2016. Projects already under development will come online
over the next five years; but longer term prospects have been slashed. Whether these
losses can be easily absorbed, or might lead to a period of heightened volatility, is a key
question explored in this chapter. The fall in investment has been accompanied by a major
reduction in the cost of producing oil and developing new fields. We examine whether this
is a transitory phenomenon or whether it represents a structural break with past trends.
There are broad implications for producers. While most members of OPEC have so far
weathered the impacts of low prices on their economies, the durability of the present
strategy is uncertain. On the non-OPEC side, we now have a better understanding of
how US tight oil reacts to a price fall, but how quickly activity and output can pick up
if prices rise remains to be tested. Some countries, including Mexico and Saudi Arabia,
have reacted to low prices by pressing ahead with a process of reform, but for others,
particularly Venezuela and some parts of the Middle East, instability has been exacerbated.
Either way, key producer countries are unlikely to emerge unchanged from the downturn,
even if prices rebound.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

The collapse in prices stimulated the largest annual boost in 2015 to global oil demand
seen in the past five years and continuing robust growth is expected in 2016. But there
are wider questions to consider looking forward. How far will the geography of demand
shift? Will India take over from China as the main source of oil demand growth? How will
oil demand change in oil exporting countries, as many are forced by fiscal strains to reform
their subsidies to fossil fuels? How great a reduction in oil demand will stem from the Paris
climate change agreement? Which segments of oil demand are most vulnerable? Where
is substitution away from oil most practicable? More broadly, does the Paris Agreement
mean that a peak in global oil demand is now in sight and could it lead to upstream assets
becoming stranded? An historic milestone was passed in 2015 with the number of electric
vehicles on the road exceeding one million. But does this signal a concerted assault on
oil’s dominance in transport or a long and tough battle for market share? These issues,
alongside many others, are explored in this chapter.

108

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

3.2 Trends to 2040 by scenario
3.2.1 Medium-term dynamics
The surplus of oil supply over demand that caused the dramatic fall in the oil price from
the end of 2014 reached a peak in mid-2015. Volumes held in storage soared and have
continued to grow (despite the surplus dissipating) over the course of 2016. The large
accumulation of stocks will act as a dampener on the pace at which future prices rise, but
we continue to judge that a price of around $80 per barrel (bbl) in 2020 is necessary to
ensure a matching of supply and demand.
Over the medium term (the next five years), the rate of global oil demand growth is
expected to slow. There are signs of a gear-change in the Chinese economy, which has
been the engine of global growth over the past ten years: the government is placing strong
emphasis on less energy-intensive economic growth. In many other non-OECD countries,
demand growth is set to be curtailed because of pricing reforms as governments reduce the
subsidies ($150 billion for oil worldwide in 2015) that have become a large fiscal burden.
In the New Policies Scenario, non-OECD oil demand growth proceeds at the slowest pace
seen for more than 20 years; but this is still enough to offset a continued reduction in
OECD countries’ demand, which is constrained by policies aiming to improve vehicle fuel
efficiency.
Understanding the differences in lead times between various types of project is essential
when evaluating medium-term supply prospects. Tight oil will be one of the fastest sources
to respond to any price increase (see section 3.3.2) and we expect tight oil to surpass its
previous peak in production before 2020. Trends in other major producers are determined
more by earlier investment decisions, such as those taken prior to the drop in oil prices in
Brazil and Canada, whose fruits will be realised over the next five years.
Among members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), production
in Iran has risen by around 700 thousand barrels per day (kb/d) since the lifting of
international sanctions at the start of 2016. Yet with multiple delays in specifying the terms
for new upstream investments, the prospect that new projects will boost capacity towards
the official target of 4.8 million barrels per day (mb/d) by 2021, compared with 3.6 mb/d in
2015, remains uncertain. Similarly, in Iraq, despite recording the biggest output gain of any
OPEC member in 2015, declining oil revenues and ongoing security issues weigh heavily
on future production prospects. Saudi Arabia, too, is facing a severe budgetary contraction
and, in response, has advanced plans to diversify the economy away from reliance on oil
revenues (its “Vision 2030” and National Transformation Program).

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Questions therefore loom over both the core of future supply and the magnitude and
geography of demand growth. The implications, of course, vary by scenario.

Chapter 3 | Oil market outlook

109

3

3.2.2 Long-term scenarios
In the Current Policies Scenario, oil demand grows at an annual average of just under
1 mb/d to 2040.1 Policy ambitions that have yet to be implemented are disregarded in this
scenario, so demand growth exhibits little slowdown over the next 25 years, requiring ever
higher prices to bring the market into balance (Figure 3.1). Demand becomes increasingly
concentrated in two sectors: transport and petrochemical feedstocks, which account for just
under three-quarters of total oil consumption by 2040, up from two-thirds currently. This
growth is met from a variety of sources: OPEC provides an increasing share, approaching
50% of global production by 2040 – a level not seen since the 1970s – while unconventional
production more than doubles between 2015 and 2040.

mb/d

Figure 3.1 ⊳ World oil demand and price by scenario
120
100

Oil demand:
Current Policies
Scenario
New Policies
Scenario

80
150

40

100

20

50

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

2030

2040

Dollars per barrel (2015)

450 Scenario

60

Oil price (right axis):
Current Policies
Scenario
New Policies
Scenario
450 Scenario

World oil demand exceeds 103 mb/d in 2040 in the New Policies Scenario

© OECD/IEA, 2016

There are significant differences in demand between the Current Policies Scenario and
the New Policies Scenario, in which tighter fuel standards start to bite and fuel switching
(to biofuels, electricity and natural gas) proceeds more quickly. These differences become
manifest even over the next five years, with the largest regional differences occurring in
China (280 kb/d lower in the New Policies Scenario in 2020), the European Union and the
United States. After 2020, the structure of economic growth in key consumers changes,
there are continued technological innovations and government policies are brought
into effect that aim to reduce the environmental impact of energy provision. In these
circumstances, global oil demand growth slows to an annual average of less than 400 kb/d
to 2040. By 2040, demand is some 13.5 mb/d lower than in the Current Policies Scenario
(Table 3.1), a gap greater than total current production in Saudi Arabia. However the policy
1. Oil demand here excludes any contribution from biofuels, which are only included when referring to “total liquids
demand”.
110

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

ambitions that are included in New Policies Scenario, which includes our assessment of the
impact of the Nationally Determined Contributions made as part of the Paris Agreement,
are insufficient to bring about a peak in oil demand prior to 2040.
On the supply side, by 2040 the main differences in the New Policies Scenario compared
with the Current Policies Scenario are in North America, with production in Canada nearly
1.5 mb/d lower, and in the Middle East, particularly in Saudi Arabia and Iraq. China and the
United States respectively import 2 mb/d and 1.5 mb/d less oil in 2040 than in the Current
Policies Scenario and by 2040 the United States has all but eliminated net imports of oil.
Table 3.1 ⊳ Oil and total liquids demand by scenario (mb/d)
New Policies

Current Policies

450 Scenario

2000

2015

2025

2040

2025

2040

2025

2040

OECD

45.0

41.5

37.3

29.8

38.5

34.6

34.4

20.7

Non-OECD

26.3

43.6

52.2

62.5

53.9

69.9

48.4

46.4

Bunkers*

5.4

7.4

8.8

11.2

9.4

12.6

7.1

6.2

World oil

76.7

92.5

98.2

103.5

101.9

117.0

89.9

73.2

Share of non-OECD

34%

47%

53%

60%

53%

60%

54%

63%

0.2

1.6

2.5

4.2

2.2

3.6

4.0

9.0

76.9

94.1

100.8

107.7

104.1

120.6

93.9

82.2

World biofuels**
World total liquids

* Includes international marine and aviation fuels. ** Expressed in energy-equivalent volumes of gasoline and diesel.
Note: See www.worldenergyoutlook.org/weomodel/ for more information on methodology and data issues.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Differences between the New Policies Scenario and the 450 Scenario highlight the extent to
which the pledges made as part of the Paris Agreement fall short of the long-term ambition
to limit global temperature rises to below 2 degrees Celsius (°C). In the 450 Scenario,
global oil demand peaks by 2020, at just over 93 mb/d. The subsequent decline in demand
accelerates year-on-year, so that by the late 2020s global demand is falling by over
1 mb/d every year. OECD countries register the largest change, relative to today’s levels of
consumption, their demand collectively declining by over 20 mb/d, led by a greater than
50% decline in the United States. There is more variation in the trajectory of demand in
non-OECD countries. Declines are led by Latin America, in which consumption drops by
1.5 mb/d between 2015 and 2040 (half in Brazil). Demand in China peaks in the mid-2020s
at around 12.5 mb/d, before falling by over 2 mb/d by 2040. In contrast, consumption in
India nearly doubles from current levels by 2040 and consumption in sub-Saharan Africa
grows by two-thirds. The rates of oil demand growth in India and sub-Saharan Africa are
around one-quarter lower than in the New Policies Scenario; but aggregate non-OECD
demand still reaches 2.8 mb/d above today’s levels in 2040.

Chapter 3 | Oil market outlook

111

3

The majority of the 30 mb/d difference in global oil demand in 2040 between the New
Policies Scenario and 450 Scenario is caused by reduced demand in the transport sector. Oil
use in passenger vehicles in the 450 Scenario falls from just under 24 mb/d today to 15 mb/d
in 2040, nearly 10 mb/d lower than the 2040 level in the New Policies Scenario. Oil use is
replaced as a result of greater uptake of electric vehicles and biofuels (see section 3.3.1).
The use of oil for freight transport is also curtailed, as natural gas and biofuels become
more widely used: 2040 demand is over 7 mb/d lower than in the New Policies Scenario.
Even so, despite substitution away from oil in the aviation and maritime sectors and a much
more diversified portfolio of fuels in the transportation sector, oil still accounts for 65% of
total transport demand in 2040 in the 450 Scenario (in energy-equivalent terms).
In contrast to the changes seen in the transport sector, consumption of oil for petrochemical
feedstocks in the 450 Scenario is largely the same as in the New Policies Scenario. There
are fewer substitution options away from oil available in the petrochemical industry (see
section 3.3.1), so by 2040 it accounts for over 20% of total oil demand in the 450 Scenario,
up from 12% today. Elsewhere, oil use in buildings is marginally lower than in the New
Policies Scenario: the enhanced decarbonisation policies pursued in the 450 Scenario
encourage the use of more efficient sources of heating and lighting, especially in developing
countries as they switch away from the use of biomass. Heightened efforts are also made
to substitute away from oil in power generation, with oil use in that application falling, on
average, by over 5% every year to 2040.
On the supply side, it is assumed in the 450 Scenario, as in the New Policies Scenario,
that OPEC maintains a strategy of controlling output in an attempt to support price levels,
even though global demand is falling from the 2020s onwards (Box 3.1). Production from
members of OPEC declines gradually between 2015 and 2040, finishing 10% below current
levels. But this drop is much slower than the pace of decline in non-OPEC production, which
falls by nearly a third over the same period. The largest change occurs in the United States,
with production over 5 mb/d lower by 2040, compared with the New Policies Scenario,
mainly as a result of lower tight oil and natural gas liquids (NGLs) production. OPEC’s share
of oil markets therefore grows steadily over the next 25 years and is consistently higher
than in the New Policies Scenario.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Determined policy action in all countries, coupled with the ample availability of low-cost
sources of oil supply, means that prices in the 450 Scenario peak during the mid-2020s at
just over $85/bbl and then decline slowly to under $80/bbl by 2040. This is a marked change
from the price trajectory in the New Policies Scenario and presents a profound challenge to
the upstream industry. There is a risk that all existing proved fossil-fuel reserves will not be
fully utilised, future investment into upstream oil assets will be curtailed and the returns
of fossil-fuel companies will be severely affected. These issues are discussed in detail in
section 3.4.2.

112

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

Box 3.1 ⊳ Producer strategies and the oil outlook

The decision by members of OPEC in November 2014 to refrain from any attempt
at active market management was a defining moment for the short-term oil market
outlook, both in terms of the oil price fall that it hastened and the path towards
rebalancing that it set in place, via the stimulus to demand and the squeeze on higher
cost supply. Despite the resulting severe economic hardship in many large hydrocarbon
producers from lower prices, it took the best part of two years, until the Algiers meeting
in September 2016, for an indication that OPEC may be ready to resume its traditional
role, with differing views on what this might mean in practice for the market.
In last year’s Outlook, we assumed in the New Policies Scenario (but not in the Low Oil
Price Scenario) that OPEC would eventually revert to a strategy of trying to manage oil
supply. We retain this view in WEO-2016. In the WEO-2015 Low Oil Price Scenario, all of
the OPEC countries lost more from lower prices than they gained from higher volumes,
compared with the New Policies Scenario. Maintaining a lower oil price environment for
the long term therefore requires the active participation of countries that lose out as a
result, a condition which, in our judgement, was unlikely to be met indefinitely. The oil
price in the New Policies Scenario is therefore higher than it would otherwise be if OPEC
members were to pursue a policy of prioritising market share.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

The profile for oil demand under the 450 Scenario raises a further set of questions.
Faced with falling demand, countries seeking to maximise the use of their resource
endowments could ramp up production in an attempt to gain market share while there
is still scope to do so. In this event, the combination of falling demand and increased
availability of low-cost oil would undoubtedly lead to even lower prices. This would
likely reduce geographic supply diversity, with associated energy security implications,
increase the risk of “stranded assets” (see section 3.4.2) and, indeed, complicate the
low-carbon transition itself. As discussed in WEO-2015, low prices can facilitate some
positive policy shifts, such as easing the removal of fossil-fuel consumption subsidies
or the introduction of an effective or actual price on CO2 emissions. However, payback
periods for many efficiency measures would increase and some renewable technology
subsidy schemes may become more costly. Policy measures would need to be
strengthened above and beyond what is already required in the 450 Scenario in order
to counteract the effect of lower oil prices on transport and industrial demand.
There are multiple uncertainties over the oil price trajectory in the 450 Scenario, but
we do not assume that this scenario sees a prolonged slump in prices. This would again
rely on countries continuing to produce at ever greater volumes, even though they
would receive less revenue as a result. One strategy to mitigate risks, from a producer
perspective, is to redouble efforts to limit dependence on fossil fuel revenue, as Saudi
Arabia is doing with its sweeping “Vision 2030” reform programme. Nevertheless,
policy-makers need to make allowance for a range of possible reactions of the key
producers under decarbonisation scenarios, to keep a low-carbon transition on track.

Chapter 3 | Oil market outlook

113

3

3.3 A closer look at the New Policies Scenario
3.3.1 Demand
Regional trends
The geography of oil demand has experienced a fundamental shift over the past 15 years.
Consumption in OECD countries fell on average by nearly 250 kb/d every year during this
period while year-on-year growth in non-OECD countries exceeded 1.1 mb/d. This nonOECD growth was underpinned by remarkable growth in China, whose demand grew on
average by more than 400 kb/d every year, amounting to a near 150% increase over the
15-year period, and a near doubling of consumption in the Middle East. As a result, while
in 2000 OECD countries consumed close to 60% of the world’s oil, they now consume less
than 45% (excluding international bunkers).
Even so, current per-capita annual oil consumption in China, at around 3 barrels per capita,
remains well below that in the United States (20 barrels per capita) and the European
Union (8 barrels per capita). There are signs of a slowdown, but we have not yet reached
the end of the era of robust Chinese oil demand growth. Under the New Policies Scenario,
demand in China grows by around 300 kb/d each year for the next ten years, but then slows
to an average annual increase of 100 kb/d from 2025 onwards. China overtakes the United
States in the early 2030s to become the world’s largest oil consumer, but China’s increase
in consumption over the next 25 years (4.1 mb/d) is less than half what was added in the
previous 25 years (8.6 mb/d).

© OECD/IEA, 2016

A key question for oil markets is whether there is another source of demand that will
offset this deceleration of growth in China, as well as the average annual 1.3% decline in
demand seen in OECD countries out to 2040. Here the picture is quite mixed. Annual oil
consumption in India is currently 1.1 barrels per capita, one-third of the level of China, and
in the New Policies Scenario, India will be the largest single source of demand growth to
2040 (Table 3.2). However, despite the fact that India’s gross domestic product (GDP) per
capita in 2030 is around the same level as China’s currently, Indian oil consumption in 2030
is below 1.7 barrels per capita. The projected pace of demand growth in India over the next
15 years is also considerably slower than that witnessed in China over the past 15 years.
This is partly because the pace of GDP growth in India is projected to be lower, but also
because car ownership per capita in 2030 in India is projected to be around 20% lower than
in China currently, given higher reliance in India on the use of mass transport and two- or
three-wheeled vehicles.
In the Middle East, a number of reforms to fossil-fuel subsidies have recently been announced
that, if maintained, will slow future consumption growth. In April 2016, for example,
Saudi Arabia unveiled an ambitious new strategy to build a more diversified economy and
reduce its reliance on oil revenues, called “Vision 2030”. Plans exist to privatise up to 5%
of Saudi Aramco (the state oil company) and create the world’s largest sovereign wealth
fund with the remaining shares. There are also aims to restructure the extensive subsidies
for energy which have been available to both industry and consumers. While prices are
114

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

expected to remain well below international market averages, these reforms provide for
an increase of over 200% in the price of diesel used in power generation (to $13/bbl) and
an increase of up to 67% for gasoline (to between $0.2-0.24/litre). The decline in oil prices
has also catalysed action in the United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Oman and Bahrain, which
have similarly announced fuel pricing liberalisation or reductions in subsidy levels. In the
New Policies Scenario, Middle East oil consumption grows at 1.3%/year between 2015 and
2040 and overtakes that of the European Union during the mid-2020s. However, this is a
reduction in the rate of growth from WEO-2015 and less than a third of the annual rate
of growth seen over the past 15 years. By 2040, consumption has grown by over 2 mb/d
in both the transport and petrochemical sectors, but this is partially offset by a 1.2 mb/d
decline in use in power generation and industry.
Table 3.2 ⊳ Oil demand by region in the New Policies Scenario (mb/d)
OECD
Americas
United States
Europe
Asia Oceania
Japan
Non-OECD
E. Europe/Eurasia
Russia
Asia

2015

2020

2025

2030

2035

2040

45.0

41.5

39.8

37.3

34.4

31.9

29.8

2015-2040

Change CAAGR*
-11.7

-1.3%

23.1

22.6

22.4

21.4

19.9

18.6

17.5

-5.1

-1.0%

18.9

18.0

17.9

16.9

15.5

14.2

13.1

-4.9

-1.3%

13.9

11.7

10.8

9.8

9.0

8.2

7.6

-4.2

-1.7%

8.0

7.2

6.6

6.0

5.5

5.1

4.8

-2.4

-1.6%

5.1

3.9

3.3

2.9

2.6

2.3

2.1

-1.8

-2.4%

26.3

43.6

48.0

52.2

55.7

59.4

62.5

18.9

1.5%

4.1

4.7

4.9

5.0

5.1

5.0

5.0

0.3

0.2%

2.6

3.0

3.0

3.1

3.1

3.0

2.9

-0.0

-0.1%

11.4

21.6

24.7

27.4

29.7

32.1

34.1

12.5

1.8%

China

4.7

11.0

12.6

13.8

14.3

14.9

15.1

4.1

1.3%

India

2.3

3.9

5.0

5.9

7.1

8.5

9.9

6.0

3.8%

Southeast Asia

3.1

4.8

5.2

5.6

6.0

6.2

6.4

1.6

1.2%

Middle East

4.3

7.9

8.5

9.2

9.7

10.3

10.9

3.0

1.3%

Africa

2.2

3.6

4.2

4.6

5.1

5.7

6.2

2.6

2.2%

South Africa

0.4

0.6

0.6

0.7

0.7

0.8

0.9

0.3

1.6%

Latin America

4.2

5.8

5.8

5.9

6.1

6.3

6.4

0.6

0.4%

Brazil

© OECD/IEA, 2016

2000

1.9

2.6

2.5

2.6

2.7

2.9

3.0

0.4

0.5%

Bunkers**

5.4

7.4

8.1

8.8

9.6

10.4

11.2

3.8

1.7%

World oil

76.7

92.5

95.9

98.2

99.8

101.7

103.5

11.0

0.5%

European Union

13.1

10.8

9.9

9.0

8.1

7.3

6.6

-4.2

-1.9%

World biofuels***

0.2

1.6

2.0

2.5

3.0

3.6

4.2

2.6

4.0%

World total liquids

76.9

94.1

97.9

100.8

102.8

105.3

107.7

13.6

0.5%

* Compound average annual growth rate. ** Includes international marine and aviation fuels. *** Expressed in energyequivalent volumes of gasoline and diesel.

Chapter 3 | Oil market outlook

115

3

Growth in demand in Africa is led by a doubling of consumption in sub-Saharan Africa.
But there is a distinct slowdown in the pace of growth in many other non-OECD countries:
annual growth to 2040 in Latin America drops to 0.4%, compared with 2.1% over the past
15 years, while growth in Eastern Europe/Eurasia all but grinds to a halt after 2020. Overall
it appears that there is unlikely to be “another China” on the horizon to spur a substantial
new wave of global oil demand growth, as long as governments enact the energy policies
that they have announced. There are, however, marked changes in the geography of oil
use: not least that demand in developing Asian countries constitutes over a third of global
oil demand by 2040, having overtaken total OECD consumption in the mid-2030s.

Sectoral trends
Oil’s share of total energy demand declines in all end-use sectors throughout the New
Policies Scenario. Yet the ease of substitution away from oil varies widely between sectors.
There are readily-available economic alternatives to the use of oil in power generation and
industrial boilers. This is reflected, for example, in the projected near halving in its use for
power generation by 2040 (Table 3.3). In the industrial sector, oil for steam and process
heat generation has dropped by around 30% since its peak around 1980. Despite a slight
volumetric increase by 2040 in the New Policies Scenario, its share of total final energy
consumption for industrial heat generation drops from 11% in 2015 to 8% by 2040, given a
much greater rate of increase in the use of gas and electricity.
These two sectors account for less than 15% of global oil demand in 2015 and, since
substitution away from oil is more difficult in all other sectors, no peak is seen in total
oil demand in the New Policies Scenario before 2040. For example, there are few direct
replacements for aviation fuel (examined in detail in WEO-2015): biofuels offer some
promise but, without strong policy support, these are unlikely to slow the growth to any
major degree. Similarly, while the share of natural gas rises slightly in the petrochemical
sector and there is a small uptake in the use of bio-derived feedstocks, this does little to
erode a 50% increase in oil use in this sector between 2015 and 2040. In road freight, while
three-quarters of global car sales are subject to efficiency standards, only four countries
(United States, China, Japan and Canada) currently have such standards for trucks.2 There
are few ready substitutes for oil in freight vehicles and so the absolute growth in oil
consumption for road freight in the New Policies Scenario is four-and-a-half-times that for
passenger vehicles.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

There are better prospects for replacing the use of oil in buildings, although the various
products consumed exhibit quite different trends across different countries. For example,
liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) is mainly used in OECD countries at present for heating and
cooking, for which it is slowly displaced by natural gas and electricity.3 However, this is
2. A public consultation on efficiency standards for trucks is currently underway in the European Union. The IEA will
release a report on the impact of trucks on future oil demand and CO2 emissions in early 2017.
3. LPG is included in the oil demand balance.
116

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

largely offset by an increase in the use of LPG as a cooking fuel in developing countries,
given their switch away from the use of solid biomass, particularly in urban areas. There is
also a small level of kerosene used in the residential sector, both for lighting and cooking.
However, kerosene use in households is on a decreasing trend, given improved electricity
access in developing countries and policies to replace kerosene as a cooking fuel, given its
negative impacts on air quality and health. The net effect is a steady decrease in the use of
oil in buildings through to 2040.
Oil use in the maritime sector has received increased interest lately, with regulatory
changes aiming to reduce the sector’s impact on local air pollution and its emissions
of carbon dioxide (CO2). International maritime transport is examined in more detail
below. Various alternatives have also been put forward to reduce the dominance of oil in
passenger vehicles. The use of biofuels and natural gas vehicles both grow at an annual
average rate of around 4% to 2040 in the New Policies Scenario. However the alternative
road vehicle that has received most recent attention is the electric car, whose prospects
are also explored below.
Table 3.3 ⊳ World oil demand by sector in the New Policies Scenario
2000

Transport
Passenger
vehicles
Maritime
Freight
Aviation

2015

2040

2015-2040

Change

Ease of
CAAGR* substitution

mb/d

%

mb/d

%

mb/d

%

39.0

51%

51.7

56%

60.5

58%

8.8

0.6%

18.2

24%

23.9

26%

24.6

24%

0.8

0.1%

Medium

3.7

5%

5.0

5%

6.2

6%

1.3

0.9%

Medium

11.9

16%

16.3

18%

19.7

19%

3.4

0.8%

Low
Low

4.6

6%

5.8

6%

9.3

9%

3.5

1.9%

14.4

19%

17.0

18%

22.7

22%

5.7

1.2%

Steam and
process heat

6.1

8%

5.8

6%

6.5

6%

0.8

0.5%

High

Petrochemical
feedstocks

8.1

11%

10.7

12%

15.7

15%

4.9

1.5%

Low

Buildings

7.7

10%

7.6

8%

6.0

6%

-1.6

-1.0%

Medium

Power generation

6.1

8%

5.4

6%

2.9

3%

-2.4

-2.4%

High

Other**

9.4

12%

10.8

12%

11.3

11%

0.5

0.2%

76.7

100%

92.5

100%

103.5

100%

11.0

0.5%

Industry

Total

* Compound average annual growth rate. ** Includes agriculture, transformation, other non-energy use (mainly bitumen
and lubricants).

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Focus: International maritime transport
The shipping sector is an important consumer of oil products, comprising around 5% of
global oil demand (Table 3.3). Almost 80% of fuel use in the sector occurs in international
shipping, commonly referred to as international marine bunkers, for which heavy
Chapter 3 | Oil market outlook

117

3

fuel oil (3.2 mb/d) and diesel (0.6 mb/d) are the two key products. International shipping is
also an important contributor to climate change: it is responsible for around 2% of global
energy-related CO2 emissions, as large as the emissions of Indonesia and Malaysia combined.
The main spur for international shipping is global trade: 90% of total international bunker
fuel use is dedicated to maritime freight, with the remainder used for passenger services.
International seaborne transport is the cheapest way to move long-distance freight and
is responsible for around 80% of global physical trade in goods. International freight
shipping activity is typically measured in tonne-kilometres (t-km) and amounts to over
80 trillion t-km today. Energy, in particular oil and oil products, is an important component
of global shipping activity, comprising one-third of international seaborne trade; bulk
goods (32%) and containerised products (15%) account for much of the remainder. The
majority of the maritime transport activity takes place using tankers, dry bulk carriers (used
for the transportation of agricultural products, coal, minerals and construction materials)
and container ships.
The largest contributors to international shipping activity for freight transport are China
and the United States, collectively accounting for around one-third of the global total
(measured on the basis of exports). Growth of seaborne trade has historically been closely
linked to economic growth and, in the New Policies Scenario, international freight shipping
activity grows on average by 3.6% each year, in line with global economic growth, and
exceeds 200 trillion t-km in 2040 (Figure 3.2). Trade activity from Africa, India and Southeast
Asia also increases, which contributes to an increase in the length of each voyage by just
over 0.3% per year on average.
Figure 3.2 ⊳ Growth in international shipping activity and fuel consumption in
240
200
160

Shipping activity
mboe/d

Trillion t-km

the New Policies Scenario

3.6%/year

6

1.9%/year

5
4

120

3

80

2

40

1
2015

2040
Non-OECD
OECD

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Fuel demand

7

2015
Other types of ships
Container ships
General cargo

2040
Bulk carriers
Oil tankers

Rate of growth in international shipping activity is double the growth in fuel consumption
Note: All fuel consumption in 2015 is oil, while in 2040 LNG accounts for around 13% in energy-equivalent terms (or
0.8 million barrels of oil equivalent per day).
118

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

Total fuel demand for international shipping grows at 1.9% per year to 2040, half the rate
of growth in shipping activity. This is both because the energy efficiency of ships improves
and because average ship sizes increase since larger ships are generally more efficient per
t-km than smaller ones. There is also diversification in the fuels used by the sector. The
average growth rate in oil consumption, at just over 1.2% per year, is one-third of the rate
of increase in activity. In 2040, nearly 50 billion cubic metres (bcm) of gas is consumed by
international shipping in the form of liquefied natural gas (LNG), around 13% of total fuel
demand (in energy-equivalent terms).
Until recently the energy intensity of international shipping was unregulated and led by
market considerations. Ship owners reacted to the period of high oil prices and the 2008
economic crisis by improving operational efficiency and introducing structural changes. An
over-capacity of ships, as well the increased size of transoceanic cargo ships, meant that
maximum speeds could be reduced, a practice, commonly referred to as slow steaming,
that leads to fuel savings. Other operational measures included ensuring ship speeds
were kept more homogeneous across routes, avoiding the need for high speed trips, and
increasing the number of stops, to increase the utilisation of ships. But the absence of
regulation limited the uptake of fuel-saving technologies.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Improving energy intensity was the intention of the Energy Efficiency Design Index (EEDI),
introduced by the International Maritime Organisation (IMO), the UN standard-setting
authority for international shipping. The EEDI entered into force in 2013 and is the first ever
globally binding energy efficiency standard for the industry. It mandates a minimum 10%
improvement in the energy efficiency per tonne-km of new ship designs from 2015, 20%
from 2020 and 30% from 2025. These improvements are benchmarked against the average
efficiency of ships built between 2000 and 2010 and are separately applied to different
groups of ships, by type and size.
In the New Policies Scenario, the adoption of the EEDI helps dampen oil demand growth
from international shipping. However, its effect is limited by the slow stock turnover in
the sector: average ship lifetimes range between 25-40 years (Box 3.2). As a result, the
average energy efficiency per ship-km of the international shipping fleet improves by
only 15% between 2015 and 2030 (the current end of the EEDI implementation period).
The increase in efficiency when measured in tonne-km, at 20%, is slightly larger, as there
is also a projected rise in the load factors of ships (in line with recent historical trends).
Improvements vary by ship type, depending on the growth of the stock of vessels over
the projection period, size increases and the average lifetime of individual ship types. For
example, container ships achieve the largest savings, with energy intensity per tonne-km
falling by over 40% by 2030 in the New Policies Scenario, because of their relatively short
lifetime and a stronger trend towards larger ship sizes. In contrast, the limited prospects for
stock growth of tankers mean that the average tanker fleet registers less than an 8% drop
in energy intensity by 2030.
Chapter 3 | Oil market outlook

119

3

Box 3.2 ⊳ Beyond EEDI: how to contain oil demand and emissions growth in
international shipping

Greenhouse-gas (GHG) emissions from international shipping were not directly included
in the 2015 Paris Agreement. Nevertheless, several options exist for reducing the oil
demand and CO2 emissions growth of maritime vessels and ships below the levels
achieved in the New Policies Scenario. Measures such as the optimisation of hull shapes
through hydrodynamic design, improvements in the efficiency of engines (waste heat
recovery or hybridisation), air lubrication and wind assistance (e.g. through kites), could
all deliver reductions in fuel use. The fuel-saving potential in existing ships is lower,
but the widespread use of retrofitting technologies, such as engine de-rating to match
operational speed and engine size, wind assistance and improved maintenance, can
deliver important GHG emission savings.
The use of alternative fuels, such as biofuels or LNG, can also reduce oil demand, with
co-benefits for reducing air pollution. LNG use in the maritime sector, however, does not
provide a full answer to the challenge of climate change, given its carbon content and
the potential for fugitive methane emissions leakage through incomplete combustion
of the gas in ship engines. Since around one-third of current shipping activity involves
transporting fossil fuels, the decarbonisation of the wider energy system in the
450 Scenario, leads to a decline in global demand for fossil-fuel carriers. This leads to
an 8% decline in overall shipping activity (in t-km) by 2040, relative to the New Policies
Scenario. Together with increased energy efficiency measures, a significant increase
in ship size and increasing use of LNG and biofuels (which could be encouraged, for
example, by a sector-wide CO2 levy or an emissions reduction target), oil demand from
international shipping could be reduced to 3.5 mb/d by 2040, just below today’s level.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Besides its importance for global oil demand growth, international shipping is also an
important emitter of air pollutants, in particular sulfur dioxide (SO2). In 2015, international
shipping activity emitted 8.2 million tonnes (Mt) SO2, 10% of global energy-related SO2
emissions (IEA, 2016a). A significant proportion of these emissions occur hundreds of miles
offshore, but coastal residents living near shipping lanes or ports are still adversely affected.
In Hong Kong, for example, the contribution from maritime activities to sulfur emissions
reached 44% before action was taken to tackle the problem. Airborne pollutants can travel
several hundred kilometres in the atmosphere, contributing to air quality problems further
inland.
The sulfur content of the heavy fuel oil used by most ships can be as high as 3.5%. This is
significantly greater than the component of oil products used in road transport (which is
as low as 10 ppm [0.001%]) and some regions have introduced regulations on the level
of sulfur emissions allowed. These “Emission Control Areas”, which encompass certain
areas within Europe, North America and the Caribbean, ensure that the flue gas from ships
operating within the designated areas must contain less than 0.1% sulfur. The IMO has
120

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

plans to introduce a wider, global cap of 0.5% from 2020, although there is discussion of
delay until 2025. There are also regional plans under discussion, in the European Union for
example, to introduce a unilateral sulfur cap, also at 0.5%, regardless of the IMO’s decision.
The IMO regulation will not specify the type or quality of the fuel to be used, only the
emissions content of the flue gas. Ship owners will therefore be free to decide whether to
use 0.5% sulfur fuels (diesel or low-sulfur heavy fuel oil), switch to low-sulfur alternative
fuels (such as LNG or biofuels), or install scrubbers to treat the engine effluents in order to
remove the acid gases arising from the combustion of high sulfur fuels. All these solutions
are likely to increase costs for ship operators. While this will have a knock-on effect on
consumer prices, the impact is likely to be small, since maritime transport costs comprise
only a fraction of the overall price of most consumer goods. In the New Policies Scenario,
the global cap on maritime sulfur is cautiously assumed to take effect from 2025 (five years
later than currently planned), bringing down SO2 emissions from international shipping
to 2.5 Mt in 2040. Earlier introduction would allow for earlier and quicker reductions
(IEA, 2016a).

Focus: electric vehicles
Electric vehicles (EVs) are not new, having provided competition for the earliest gasolinepowered vehicles (in 1900, electric cars accounted for one-third of all vehicles on US
roads) before they lost out to the internal combustion engine. After fading from view,
they have made periodic and partial comebacks since the 1970s, before the latest – and
strongest – surge since 2000. From a policy perspective, they have several advantages
over conventional cars. They offer a way to reduce the oil dependency of road transport,
diminish urban air pollution and combat climate change (if the electricity used is produced
from low-carbon sources). Yet, they have never achieved a significant share of the global
car market. Historically, prohibitively high costs and compromises on performance (such as
range limitations) led to low consumer acceptance and a market that was supplied by only
a few manufacturers.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

In 2015, however, the global stock of EVs climbed to 1.3 million, a near doubling of the
stock in 2014 (IEA, 2016b).4 Although the share of electric cars in the global vehicle stock
is still only 0.1%, this is a marked improvement from historic levels. Momentum has been
broadly maintained over the first-half of 2016, as registrations in the European Union
rose by around 20% and 130% in China, compared with the first-half of 2015 (EAFO,
2016; CAAM, 2016). China is now the largest market for EV sales, followed by the United
States. The increase in sales has been accompanied by growth in the supply of EV support
equipment. The number of publicly accessible chargers in 2015, for example, is estimated
to be 190 000 globally, up from 110 000 in 2014.

4. Electric cars here include full battery electric and plug-in hybrid electric vehicles.

Chapter 3 | Oil market outlook

121

3

The recent rise of EVs has emerged both as a result of continuous technological improvements
and because of mounting policy support (Table 3.4). Since 2008, research, development
and deployment, as well as growing battery use in markets such as consumer electronics,
have contributed to a four-fold increase in battery energy density. Costs have also fallen
to less than $270 per kilowatt-hour (kWh) for batteries used in plug-in hybrid vehicles
(PHEVs) and about $210/kWh for battery electric vehicles (BEVs).5 Such improvements
offer extended electric driving ranges at lower costs. Countries with the highest uptake of
electric cars have typically made use of vehicle-purchase incentives, including subsidies
and tax incentives, and invested in the deployment of recharging infrastructure to support
deployment (IEA, 2016b; Tietge et al., 2016). Complementary measures often include
exemptions from certain fees, such as parking or congestion charges, waivers on access
restrictions, such as to urban centres or bus lanes, and exemptions from policies that limit
the availability of new licence plates to combat urban air pollution.6 Ambitions for the
future deployment of EVs are high: Tesla Motors targets 0.5 million annual EV sales by 2018
(from 50 000 in 2015); Renault-Nissan aims for cumulative sales of 1.5 million EVs by 2020;
Volvo aims to sell 1 million EVs by 2025; and Volkswagen recently announced a strategic
shift to EVs and aims to launch 30 BEV models and achieve annual sales of 2-3 million
by 2025.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

In the New Policies Scenario, existing and planned policies and a wider availability of EV
models continue to drive their deployment: their stock rises by around 50% per year to
about 10 million by 2020 and 30 million by 2025. By 2040, the global stock of EVs exceeds
150 million, around two-thirds of which are plug-in hybrids (Figure 3.3).7 However this
represents only around 8% of the global passenger light-duty vehicle stock in 2040 and the
impact on oil consumption is limited: 0.3 mb/d oil demand is displaced in 2025 and 1.3 mb/d
in 2040. However the deployment of EVs becomes significant in individual markets where
the policy environment is particularly conducive. In northern Europe (Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Norway and Sweden), for example, EVs reach 16% of the total car stock in 2040,
with a sales share of more than 20% in that year. This is triggered by favourable overall
regulatory frameworks (including strong commitments to reduce economy-wide CO2
emissions), high fuel taxes, high taxes for the purchase of conventional cars (which improve
the competitiveness of EVs and increase the effect of performance-based differentiated

5. BEVs have a lower power-to-energy ratio than plug-in hybrid electric vehicles. This leads to higher energy content per
battery cell, and therefore lower cost per unit of energy stored in each cell.
6. For example, seven Chinese cities restrict the availability of licence plates, primarily through lotteries and/or auctions,
and apply much looser restrictions to licences issued for electric cars (IEA, 2016b).
7. It is assumed that purchase subsidies remain in place until 2020 in countries where they currently exist, but they are
reduced by half by 2025 and are then progressively phased out towards 2040. While important for the initial market
uptake of EVs, financial incentives reduce government revenues from vehicle purchase taxes. For example, if the average
selling price of a car is $20 000 and the tax on vehicle purchases is 20%, while EVs are subsidised by $5 000 and exempt
from tax, then government revenues from vehicle taxation decline by 11% once the market share of EVs reaches 5%. The
effect is compounded by loss of revenue from the taxation of petroleum products, which are most significant in countries
with high levels of taxation, i.e. those with the highest shares of EVs in the New Policies Scenario.
122

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

vehicle taxation) and commitments to develop recharging infrastructure. The largest
market for new EVs over the projection period is, by some margin, China, although its
share of the global electric fleet shrinks from around 50% in 2025 to about 40% by 2040 as
deployment in other countries increases. By 2040, one-out-of-nine cars in China is electric.
The share of EVs in the total car stock is otherwise generally higher in countries with high
taxes on oil products, such as Japan (16% in 2040). The United States is one of the leading
global markets for EVs in the New Policies Scenario, in terms of overall volume, though
deployment targets for 2020 are lower than in other OECD countries. Nevertheless, EVs
constitute only 8% of the total US light-duty vehicle stock by 2040, with higher uptake
held back by lower gasoline taxes, which limit the possible fuel cost savings from EVs, and
vehicle sizes that are larger than in any other region.
Table 3.4 ⊳ Electric vehicle deployment targets and policy initiatives

© OECD/IEA, 2016

by country

Electric car targets

Direct electric car policy initiatives

China

Stock target:
4.6 million (2020)

Purchase rebates and tax exemptions up to $9 000; road/
bridge/tunnel tolls exemption in some places; waiver on
lotteries/auctions for new licence plates.

France

Stock target:
2 million (2020)

Purchase rebates: $7 100 (BEVs), $1 100 (PHEVs); exemption
from annual tax for company cars.

Germany

Stock target:
1 million (2020)

$3 300-4 400 purchase rebate; differentiated number plates
enabling local circulation incentives.

India

Stock target:
200 000 - 400 000 (2020)

City of Delhi: 15% purchase rebate, VAT exemption and 50%
discount on road taxes; additional incentives at state level.

Japan

Stock target: 1 million
(2020); sales share
target*: 50-70% (2030)

Purchase incentives up to $5 000; government grants <50% on
charger installation cost; public-private partnerships for the
installation of public charging infrastructure.

Netherlands

Sales share target:
30% (BEVs) and 20%
(PHEVs) (2025)

CO2-based tax, road tax exemption and lower purchase tax for
company cars (BEVs; PHEV incentives reduced since 2016); for
companies, charging infrastructure investment deductible from
tax in some cases.

Norway

Stock target:
50 000 (2018, already
exceeded)

Purchase tax exemption equivalent to $12 000; VAT exemption
for BEVs; free access to toll roads, bus lanes, municipal parking
and public charging.

Sweden

No official target

$4 400 rebate on BEV purchase and $2 200 on PHEV; five years
of road tax exemption and company car tax reduction.

United
Kingdom

Sales share targets*:
16% (2020), 60% (2030),
100% (2040)

Maximum purchase rebate of $6 300 (BEV) and $3 500
(PHEV); government subsidy of $700 per each private charging
installation.

United
States

Stock target*:
3.3 million (2025)
across eight states

$7 500 federal tax credit on BEVs and high range
PHEVs; additional state-specific purchase incentives.

* Includes fuel-cell electric vehicles. BEVs = battery electric vehicles; PHEVs = plug-in hybrid vehicles;
EV = electric vehicles.
Source: Update of data in IEA (2016b).

Chapter 3 | Oil market outlook

123

3

Million vehicles

Figure 3.3 ⊳ Electric vehicles in circulation in the New Policies Scenario
150

100%

120

80%

90

60%

60

40%

30

20%

2015

2020

2025

2030

2035

Other
Southeast Asia
OECD Asia Oceania
India
OECD Americas
European Union
China

BEVs share of global EVs
(right axis)

2040

Electric vehicles grow from 1.3 million in 2015 to over 150 million by 2040

© OECD/IEA, 2016

The market uptake of EVs in the New Policies Scenario comes with significant cost reductions.
There is no certainty by how much battery costs can ultimately decline, but the rapid pace
of deployment in the New Policies Scenario brings projected average battery costs for BEVs
down to around $125/kWh by 2025 and just above $100/kWh by 2040.8 While impressive,
such cost reductions do not mean that EVs become competitive with conventional cars,
even when taking into account the expected higher cost of more fuel-efficient conventional
cars. At $125/kWh in 2025, for example, the additional costs of an average BEV and a home
charger are around $6 500, compared with an equivalent average conventional European
car (excluding potential subsidies) and around $8 500 for an equivalent average US car,
which is larger and more powerful than in Europe. A faster decline in costs, to $100/kWh
within the next ten years, as is expected by some car manufacturers, would reduce these
additional costs to $5 000 for an average European car and $6 500 for an average US
car. This is still a sizeable difference: diesel cars in Europe are on average around $2 000
more expensive than their gasoline-equivalents and have made major inroads only in
markets where taxes on diesel fuels are low. Further, although EVs offer considerable fuel
expenditure savings, the payback times associated with the additional capital costs are still
well above the two-to-three-years that a consumer would typically tolerate (Figure 3.4).
Nevertheless, with the projected cost reductions, the additional costs of electric cars are
not a major impediment for their deployment. In all circumstances, payback periods are
quicker for commercial cars with high annual mileages, such as taxis, company fleets or
car-share vehicles, as the higher upfront investment can be offset by fuel cost savings more

8. The US Department of Energy estimates that battery costs for a 100 kWh battery pack could decline to $80/kWh, if all
chemistry problems can be resolved, system engineering is favourable and batteries are manufactured in high volumes
(US DOE, 2015a). The US DOE target for 2022 is $125/kWh (US DOE, 2015b).
124

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

quickly. For example, with an annual mileage of 60 000 kilometres (km) (several times more
than the average), a BEV pays off in less than four years in the United States and just one
year in Europe by 2025. Consumers may, also, increasingly decide to opt for the purchase of
smaller EVs, rather than larger conventional ones, especially if the use of EVs is connected
with additional benefits. This would reduce the required investment and payback time.
Figure 3.4 ⊳ Average payback times for electric vehicles in the
Years

New Policies Scenario

35

BEV:
Without subsidies

30

With subsidies

25

PHEV:
Without subsidies
With subsidies

20
15
10
5
2015 2040
United States

2015 2040
China

2015 2040
Japan

2015 2040
Europe

Payback times for electric cars fall, but remain
well beyond typical consumer expectations
Notes: BEVs = battery electric vehicles; PHEVs = plug-in hybrid vehicles. Payback times differ by market depending on
the typical average car size, typical annual distance driven and the level of fuel taxation. For the cost comparison, BEVs
are assumed to have a range of 200 km in 2015 and 350 km in 2040 and PHEVs to drive 30% of their annual distance
in electric mode in 2015 and 40% in 2040. Subsidies in 2015 are $5 000 for BEVs and $3 300 for PHEVs in all regions;
subsidies are assumed to be fully phased out by 2040.

The deployment of electric vehicles could, of course, be substantially higher than projected
in the New Policies Scenario if there were additional policy interventions beyond those
currently in prospect, or significant changes in consumer preferences. In the 450 Scenario,
for example, the global stock of EVs rises to over 710 million by 2040, displacing more
than 6 mb/d of oil demand. For the automotive industry, confidence in a long-term policy
commitment to electric cars would encourage more investment in EV manufacturing,
widening the range of models and providing more tailored options for consumers. But
there is also a need to increase the attraction of EVs to consumers, given the long payback
times. Specific policy measures could include:

© OECD/IEA, 2016



Foreshadowing progressively tighter fuel-economy and emissions regulations
(including for air pollutants) to indicate a long-term commitment to electric cars.
Existing and planned standards, as reflected in the New Policies Scenario, can largely
be met with conventional technologies without the need for EVs (even if EVs can
enhance the ease of achieving the targets).

Chapter 3 | Oil market outlook

125

3



Measures that favour access and parking for electric vehicles (such as differentiated
parking prices and access to low emission zones) linked with vehicle performances.



Support for the development of recharging infrastructure to help foster consumer
confidence and reduce range concerns about the limited range of electric vehicles.



Financial incentives such as differentiated vehicle taxation based on environmental
performance. This would make the financial case for purchasing an EV more persuasive
and lessen any consumer shift towards larger cars. Such financial incentives should be
reviewed regularly and adapted to changes in market conditions, to mitigate the risk
of placing an excessive burden on government budgets, but without casting doubt on
the long-term commitment to support EVs.

Trends by oil product
Petrochemicals and road transport are the sectors which make the largest contributions
to global oil demand growth (Table 3.3) and so the fastest growing oil product might be
expected to be one of the key products in these two sectors. Yet it is kerosene use that
grows fastest, because of its dominance in aviation, one of the few sectors with a positive
growth trajectory in OECD countries, which also sees rapid growth in non-OECD economies.
Indeed the use of kerosene is increasingly concentrated in aviation, as residential use for
heating in OECD countries and for lighting and cooking in non-OECD countries is expected
to decline, due to fuel substitution and increased access to clean energy sources.
Figure 3.5 ⊳ Change in global oil product demand in the
mb/d

New Policies Scenario

8

Other products
Diesel
Gasoline
Kerosene
Naphtha
LPG
Ethane
Heavy fuel oil
Total

6
4
2
0
-2

2000-05 2005-10 2010-15 2015-20 2020-25 2025-30 2030-35 2035-40

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Diesel and gasoline led recent increases in global demand
but kerosene for aviation exhibits the greatest future growth

Product use for petrochemical feedstocks in non-OECD countries rises by nearly 6 mb/d
between 2015 and 2040, but these increases are shared between naphtha, ethane and
LPG. Diesel rises by close to 3 mb/d (Figure 3.5), given increases in shipping and road
126

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

freight. The use of diesel in passenger vehicles grows until the early 2020s, but thereafter
reductions in use among members of the European Union increasingly outweigh growth
in non-OECD countries, and so by 2040 diesel use for passenger vehicles falls below 2015
levels.
Gasoline demand received a boost in 2015 as low prices encouraged a surge in driving in
China and the United States. Over the longer term, such effects wane and demand grows
more modestly, as fuel standards improve the efficiency of the vehicle stock. Gasoline
consumption in non-OECD countries grows by over 5.5 mb/d, and global demand eventually
reaches a high point in the early 2030s at just over 23 mb/d. This is not far in practice from
today’s level as growth in non-OECD countries is balanced by a commensurate reduction
in gasoline for road transportation in OECD countries. The marginal changes in headline
figures therefore mask an 11 mb/d swing in gasoline demand from OECD to non-OECD
countries.

3.3.2 Production
Resources and reserves

© OECD/IEA, 2016

The fall in the oil price has not had any major impact on estimates of remaining technically
recoverable oil resources and reserves (Table 3.5). This is unsurprising for resource estimates
since these are expressly defined to be independent of the prevailing oil price. But the
oil price drop should have had a greater effect on the proved reserve estimates: these
are defined as the volumes can be produced economically with reasonable certainty. Such
changes have not materialised within the publicly available sources of reported proved
reserves, such as those reported by BP Statistical Review or the Oil and Gas Journal. In the
BP Statistical Review, for example, only two out of approximately 50 countries registered
a downward revision of reserves when taking into account the production that occurred
in 2015. Global reported proved reserves thus fell by less than 3 billion barrels in 2015,
under 0.2% of reported remaining proved reserves. This highlights a key difficulty with
such estimates and why we avoid using them directly in our modelling. We use, instead, a
detailed field-by-field analysis and our database of global remaining technically recoverable
resources.
Our estimates of remaining conventional oil resources are based upon combining, at a
country-level, IEA estimates for remaining “known oil” and estimates from the United
States Geological Survey (USGS) of undiscovered oil and “reserves growth”. Previously
the known oil estimates used by the USGS when generating its reserve growth estimates
had not been released publicly. However, a recent report provides its assumptions, albeit
aggregated at a global level (USGS, 2015). The USGS estimate of cumulative production and
reserves outside the United States is 2 060 billion barrels, which is in close alignment with
the IEA equivalent estimate of 2 050 billion barrels. Our resource estimates include large
volumes of oil that are yet-to-be-found. However the volume of conventional oil discovered
each year fell consistently between 2010 and 2014, despite huge levels of investment
into exploration over this period. This situation has been exacerbated following the price
Chapter 3 | Oil market outlook

127

3

decline, as exploration investment was one of the first areas to be cut (IEA, 2016c). The
volume of discoveries in 2015 fell to a 70-year low.
The tight oil resource potential of the United States has been analysed in detail by many
organisations: all agree that remaining technically recoverable resources are large, but
there is still a high degree of uncertainty surrounding the total. The range of estimates
for individual shale plays remains wide even when large numbers of wells have been
drilled. For example, adding together the lowest and highest estimates for each play that is
considered to hold potential (including from the US DOE/EIA [2015], Goldman Sachs [2016],
USGS [2011, 2012c, 2013] and Rystad Energy) provides a range between 30-120 billion
barrels for total US tight oil resources. To ensure that a consistent method is used across
all plays, the 2015 data from the Energy Information Administration (EIA) forms the basis
of our central tight oil resource estimate (used in the New Policies Scenario) of 80 billion
barrels.9 We do, though, consider the implications of different estimates in a sensitivity
analysis (see non-OPEC production section).
Table 3.5 ⊳ Remaining technically recoverable oil resources by type
and region, end-2015 (billion barrels)
Conventional
Crude oil

NGLs

Unconventional
EHOB

Kerogen
oil

Total

Tight oil

Resources

Proven
reserves

OECD

319

144

808

1 016

135

2 422

254

Americas

250

101

805

1 000

104

2 260

237

Europe

59

25

3

4

16

107

13

Asia Oceania

10

18

-

12

16

56

4

1 882

404

1 068

57

285

3 697

1 448

260

65

552

20

88

984

142

Non-OECD
E. Europe/Eurasia
Asia

125

50

3

4

56

239

46

Middle East

940

153

14

30

29

1 166

803

Africa

316

87

2

-

54

459

130

Latin America

242

50

497

3

57

849

326

2 201

548

1 876

1 073

420

6 118

1 703

World

Notes: EHOB = extra-heavy oil and bitumen. The IEA databases include NGLs from unconventional reservoirs
(i.e. associated with shale gas) outside the United States, assuming similar gas wetness to that seen in the United States;
these unconventional NGLs resources are included in conventional NGLs for simplicity.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Sources: IEA database; USGS (2012a, 2012b, 2015); OGJ (2015); BP (2016); BGR (2015); US DOE/EIA/ARI (2013, 2014).
9. The latest EIA tight oil resource estimate is 88 billion barrels, which includes both crude oil and lease condensate
volumes. Lease condensate is a mixture of light hydrocarbons recovered as a liquid from gas fields and extracted before
the gas is transported downstream, and is generally classified as NGLs. The EIA’s tight oil production figures also contain
some lease condensate. Our historical tight oil production figures for the United States generally follow those of the EIA,
to aid comparability, and so some lease condensate is therefore also included. Our central tight oil resource estimate,
which is 10% lower than the EIA’s estimate, therefore does not aim to remove all condensates.
128

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

S P O T L I G H T
Will upstream capital costs bounce back?
The IEA Upstream Investment Cost Index (UICI) is an indicator of how the capital costs
of a set of representative upstream oil and gas projects around the world have evolved
over time (IEA, 2016c).10 It measures changes in the cost of the construction materials
and equipment (e.g. steel, cement), labour, drilling rigs and oilfield services required
for these projects. The UICI more than doubled between 2000 and 2014, but has since
fallen back dramatically; indeed, even in nominal terms, the cost of exploration and
production is now broadly similar to what it was in 2005 (Figure 3.6) and in real terms
it is much lower. A major factor underlying this decrease has been the efficiency gains
achieved by operators when oil prices fell, especially in tight oil areas. Yet the UICI
has traditionally always moved in tandem with oil prices: if prices increase, demand
for services and equipment grows, the cost of oilfield services increases and so the
UICI moves upwards. The converse is also true. But a key question facing the industry
is whether the recent drop in costs will simply reverse when prices rise, as has been
seen with previous cost declines, or whether the present downturn represents a more
structural break with the historical relationship.
One element in common with previous cost declines is the overhang in the availability
of oilfield labour and equipment. Historically this has gradually been worked off when
prices rise, as companies restart upstream activity and new investments pick up.
However, a key difference this time is the magnitude of the overhang in the service
industry. Over the past decade, our analysis indicates that the growth in investment
by the top three drilling and service contractors was 50% greater than the growth in
capital spending by upstream companies. In other words, the service industry was
investing heavily for a market that was derailed by the oil price drop: the over-supply
may therefore take longer to work off than in past downturns.
In addition, the severity of this downturn has meant that upstream companies made
sizeable reductions in their workforces. A pick up in investments could be slow to
emerge if this constrains their ability to react to any price increase. In any case, these
companies are likely to exercise caution in committing to major new investments. The
cost of raw materials, which fell by around a third between 2014 and 2016, is also likely
to remain subdued, given the anticipated slower pace of economic growth globally.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

On balance, we have taken the view that costs in the New Policies Scenario grow only
marginally over the next three to four years, despite the rebound in oil prices seen in
this scenario. There is variation across different regions, sectors and industry segments,
and companies may be able to take advantage of lower costs over a prolonged period
by locking-in contracts for certain services. However, the present downturn probably

10. The projects included within the UICI are fixed, i.e. the UICI does not account for changes in the complexity or
geography of upstream projects that have been executed since 2000. A combination of these changes with changes in
the UICI would be reflected in the global average cost of producing a barrel of oil.

Chapter 3 | Oil market outlook

129

3

does not represent a full structural break with past trends. Over the longer run, once
the labour and equipment overhang is eliminated, we anticipate that costs globally
will revert to the traditional pattern of moving broadly in line with prices. Of course,
if prices do not rebound as projected in the New Policies Scenario, then costs are also
likely to remain suppressed for a prolonged period.

Index (2000 = 100)

Figure 3.6 ⊳

IEA Upstream Investment Cost Index and oil price

350

IEA crude oil import price (real)

300
250
200
150

IEA Upstream Investment Cost Index
(nominal)

100
50
2000

2004

2008

2012

2016

Upstream oil and gas costs have dropped 30% since 2014
Source: IEA (2016c).

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Production prospects
Oil production surged between 2010 and 2015, registering its largest five-year increase since
the late 1970s. This surge was built on the back of a prolonged period of oil prices, averaging
above $90/bbl. In the New Policies Scenario, the fruits of prior investments are slowly reaped
in terms of new production over the next five years. Prices recover to 2020, spurring new
production from the more responsive sources of supply, much of which is required to replace
underlying declines in currently-producing fields (see section 3.4.1). Non-OPEC production
leads the way, exceeding relatively modest gains in OPEC over this period (Figure 3.7).
Thereafter, the drop in investment that has occurred to date weighs heavily on future
production. Growth in aggregate non-OPEC production grinds to halt, before exhibiting an
accelerating decline between 2025 and 2040. Members of OPEC are therefore increasingly
relied upon to meet demand growth and OPEC’s share of production grows steadily from 2020
and 2040. But it is important to recognise that these New Policies Scenario trends assume
that investment in new upstream projects recovers from today’s levels when prices start to
rise. A very different picture can emerge, looking forward, if the drop in prices presages a
prolonged period of suppressed upstream investment. A future supply constraint becomes
increasingly likely the longer investment stays low, a possibility explored in section 3.4.1.
130

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

Figure 3.7 ⊳ Change in non-OPEC and OPEC oil production in the
mb/d

New Policies Scenario

10

50%

8

40%

6

30%

4

20%

2

10%

0

0%

-2

2000-05
OPEC

2005-10

2010-15

Non-OPEC

2015-20

2020-25

2025-30

2030-35

3

2035-40

Share of OPEC at end of interval (right axis)

Despite recent gains by non-OPEC, OPEC dominates future production growth after 2020

Oil production by type
Conventional crude oil currently comprises by far the largest share of oil production.
While it maintains this position throughout the New Policies Scenario, underlying declines
(discussed in detail below) mean that production from currently producing fields falls by
over 45 mb/d by 2040, so a high degree of investment in new fields is required to ensure
there is no precipitous drop (Table 3.10).

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Other sources of production become increasingly important, including extra-heavy oil and
bitumen (EHOB), tight oil and natural gas liquids. EHOB rises by 3 mb/d between 2015
and 2040, shared almost equally between Canada and Venezuela. The vast majority of
tight oil production over the timeframe of the New Policies Scenario occurs in the United
States. Canada currently has around 0.35 mb/d of tight oil production but this increases
by less than 0.15 mb/d between 2015 and 2040 in the New Policies Scenario. Outside the
United States, there is nearly 1.6 mb/d of tight oil production by 2040, similar to the levels
foreseen in WEO-2015, with Mexico, Russia and Argentina the main sources of production
growth.
NGLs play an important role in the economics of gas field development, providing an
additional revenue stream, and their production tends to governed by the dynamics of gas
markets. With the knowledge of tight oil and shale gas production continuing to evolve,
we have revised NGL production in the base year of this year’s Outlook, compared with
WEO-2015. Given better data availability, some 900 kb/d of lease condensate in the United
States, that we previously categorised as crude, has been reclassified as NGLs. In the New
Policies Scenario, NGL production grows by over 5 mb/d, mirroring the increase in natural
gas production and exceeds 20 mb/d by 2040.
Chapter 3 | Oil market outlook

131

Tight oil in the United States
The rapid emergence of tight oil as a major source of new production has undoubtedly
been one of the largest shocks to oil markets in recent times. Tight oil production rose from
less than 0.5 mb/d in 2010 to 4.3 mb/d in 2015.11 Along with growth of 1.5 mb/d over the
same timeframe in US NGL production, largely stemming from shale gas plays, this reversed
the decline in US oil production that had been ongoing for nearly 40 years.
The abrupt drop in oil prices presented a disruptive challenge to the tight oil industry in
the United States. It was estimated to have relatively high break-even costs before 2014,
which meant that investment was expected to dry up quickly as prices fell, with production
dropping soon after given the high decline rates of wells. But the resilience of tight oil
production has been impressive. The number of tight oil rigs may have fallen from its peak
by around 80%, but by mid-2016 production had dropped by less than 15%. A number of
factors explain this.
First, while production from an individual tight oil well falls rapidly in the early years,
it eventually reaches a level after which production declines slowly. Given that around
38 000 horizontal tight oil wells were completed between 2010 and 2014, these wells
provide a cushion or base level of production that is quite insensitive to changes in the oil
price.
Second, operators have managed to improve the average initial production and estimated
ultimate recovery (EUR) of new wells. The average EUR per well across a number of the
major tight oil plays (the Bakken shale, Eagle Ford shale and Permian basin) jumped by
between 20-40% between 2014 and 2015. A key explanation for this has been the growing
ability of operators to focus drilling within the best acreage owned, the so-called sweet
spots, reducing the number of wells drilled in less productive areas. Operators have also
continued to optimise the lateral length of horizontal wells and the amount of proppant
used during hydraulic fracturing in order to improve the economics of production (as
discussed in WEO-2015).
Third, operators have been able to fall back on their large inventory of drilled, but
uncompleted, wells (DUCs) to maintain production levels. Although the number of DUCs is
quite uncertain, prior to the drop in prices the DUC inventory is estimated to have grown to
a peak of around 6 000. Because a large portion of the required capital for these wells had
already been spent – drilling accounts for around 30% of the full cost of a tight oil well –
operators have since been working through their inventories. Of the 9 000 horizontal tight
oil wells completed in 2015, around 10% were previously DUCs.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Fourth, operators have been able to cut costs through higher drilling efficiencies. This
has occurred because of operational improvements and the increased availability of
higher quality drilling rigs (as older and less efficient rigs were retired), staffed by more
11. We do not classify as tight oil any production before 2006, so historical tight oil production figures are around
350 kb/d lower than those given by the EIA.
132

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

experienced staff (as less proficient crews were laid off). The average number of days taken
to drill a horizontal well across the major tight oil plays has fallen by around 20% from the
level in 2014. As a result of these improvements, as well as reductions in the costs of raw
materials and services, the average cost of drilling a horizontal well in 2015 was 15% lower
than in 2014 (Spotlight). Consequently the break-even costs of tight oil wells have fallen
and allowed drilling to continue.
There are similarly good reasons to suspect a slow response to any price rebound. First,
the tight oil boom was built on the back of debt: our analysis of a representative sample
of 30 tight oil operators suggests that around 90% were cash-flow negative even when
prices were high.12 Since the price fall, capital budgets have been slashed, but the financial
situation of a large number of operators remains extremely weak and many companies
have been declared bankrupt. Companies will need time to repair their balance sheets
(reduce their debt levels) in order to raise the finance necessary for a new wave of tight oil
development.
Second, the length and depth of the price downturn means that it will take time to bring
sufficient rigs, staffed by skilled personnel, back into operation. With the drop in oil prices,
many rigs, along with other drilling and completion equipment, have been placed in storage
or, in some cases, broken up for scrap. Taking into account the time to re-certify the rig and
re-train operating personnel, we estimate that it will take at least six months to bring back
into operation a rig that has been put into storage.
Figure 3.8 ⊳ US tight oil production as a function of estimated resources
mb/d

Resources (billion barrels):

8

120
110
100

6

90
80 NPS

4

70
60
50
40
30

2

2010

2015

2020

2025

2030

2035

2040

US tight oil production is extremely sensitive to assumed resource availability

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Notes: NPS = New Policies Scenario. Oil prices in all pathways are from the New Policies Scenario.

12. A company is cash-flow negative when the revenue received from selling any oil and associated gas that is produced
is not sufficient to cover the drilling of the next well once all costs and taxes have been paid.

Chapter 3 | Oil market outlook

133

3

Our detailed modelling at well level on a play-by-play basis takes all of the above factors
into consideration. In the New Policies Scenario, with our updated assessment of resource
availability (80 billion barrels), US tight oil production rebounds to 5.2 mb/d in 2020 and
peaks at just over 6.1 mb/d in the late 2020s. However, this outlook is particularly sensitive
to estimates of the remaining technically recoverable resources (Figure 3.8), which could
range anywhere between 30 and 120 billion barrels (see resources and reserves section).
Production in 2040 could exceed 8 mb/d if resources are high, or fall back to 1 mb/d at
the opposite end of the spectrum. With our New Policies Scenario resource and price
assumptions, production declines throughout the 2030s; but, by this time, net imports of
oil to the United States are less than 1 mb/d. If remaining recoverable resources are closer
to 100 billion barrels, rather than the 80 billion barrels we assume, it is possible that the
United States could become a net exporter of oil by the early 2030s.
Figure 3.9 ⊳ Sensitivity of US tight oil production in 2025 to oil prices
Tight oil production in 2025 (mb/d)

and resource availability

9

6

$130/bbl
$120/bbl
$110/bbl
$100/bbl
$90/bbl
$80/bbl

5

$70/bbl

4

$60/bbl

3

$50/bbl

8
New Policies Scenario
assumption

7

2
1

$40/bbl
30

40

50

60

70

80

90
100
110
120
Tight oil resources (billion barrels)

© OECD/IEA, 2016

A wide range of US tight oil production levels emerge as resources and oil prices are varied

Oil prices also clearly influence the number of rigs in operation and number of wells that
can be drilled economically. When the uncertainty in resource availability and future oil
prices is combined, the range of possible future trajectories for tight oil is widened further
(Figure 3.9).13 If prices remain low and are $40/bbl in 2025, production of US tight oil in
2025 is less than 1 mb/d, regardless of total resource availability. Similarly, if resources are
13. This analysis is carried out using the simplifying assumption that tight oil production volumes in the United States
do not materially change the global oil price.
134

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

closer to the lower end of the estimates, then production falls to well below current levels,
regardless of how high the price is in 2025. Conversely, if the price were to rise to above
$130/bbl in 2025, or if the remaining resource potential were to be close to 120 billion
barrels, then production could exceed the 6 mb/d reached in the New Policies Scenario by
up to 1 mb/d.

Non-OPEC production
Non-OPEC production increased on average by over 700 kb/d each year over the past
15 years; but, in the New Policies Scenario, this rate of growth slows considerably and
eventually reverses. Annual production grows by just over 200 kb/d from 2015 until
reaching a peak of just under 55 mb/d in the early 2020s. After this, year-on-year declines
are just under 100 kb/d until 2035, before accelerating to over 250 kb/d for the final five
years of the 2030s (Table 3.6). The level of peak non-OPEC production is lower and occurs
later than in WEO-2015. But with longer term production higher by around 1 mb/d, the
rate of decline following this peak is more moderate. The different shape of projected
output, compared with WEO-2015, is largely a function of changes to the outlook for tight
oil production in the United States. Tight oil takes slightly longer to ramp up in the near
term, but the larger resource base means a higher level of production in the longer term,
with production in 2040, for example, some 1.5 mb/d higher than in WEO-2015.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Total oil production in Russia reached an historic high in 2015 of 11.1 mb/d as Russian
companies were shielded to a large extent from the decline in oil prices. The rates of two
of the key taxes levied, the mineral resource extraction (MET) tax and export duties, are
functions of the prevailing world oil price. When prices fell, the rates of these taxes fell,
so the government bore the majority of the loss of revenue. Russian companies were also
aided by the fall in value of the rouble, which almost halved against the US dollar between
July 2014 and July 2016. Oil prices, in rouble terms, therefore only fell by around 20%
over this period. However, although Russian production costs remain among the lowest in
the world, operators in Russia have not enjoyed cost reductions (largely in roubles) to the
extent of the general reduction in costs seen elsewhere.
On balance, Russian producers have weathered the oil price drop better than international
oil companies, and many managed to maintain, or even increase, capital spending in 2015
(in rouble terms). A key risk for producers is that fiscal terms will change in coming years,
given the reduction in revenues that the government has experienced. Yet even if tax rates
remain the same, it is important to recognise that, just as the Russian tax system shielded
companies from the decrease in oil prices, they are unlikely to reap a large share of the
benefit from any upturn in prices. With the boost in recent investment, production in the
New Policies Scenario remains broadly flat over the next five years. But over the longer
term, although new fields are developed in the mature conventional crude basins of West
Siberia and the Volga-Urals, along with frontier projects, such as tight oil and in the Arctic,
these are not sufficient to offset field declines and Russian production drops steadily, to
under 8.5 mb/d by 2040.
Chapter 3 | Oil market outlook

135

3

Table 3.6 ⊳ Non-OPEC oil production in the New Policies Scenario (mb/d)
2015-2040

2000

2015

2020

2025

2030

2035

2040

OECD

21.8

23.7

25.3

26.1

26.2

26.1

25.4

1.7

0.3%

Americas

14.1

19.8

21.5

22.5

22.8

22.8

22.3

2.5

0.5%

Canada

2.7

4.4

5.1

5.1

5.3

5.6

6.1

1.7

1.3%

Mexico

3.5

2.6

2.4

2.6

3.0

3.2

3.4

0.8

1.1%

United States

7.9

12.8

14.1

14.7

14.5

14.0

12.8

0.0

0.0%

6.8

3.5

3.2

3.0

2.7

2.5

2.2

-1.2

-1.8%

Europe
Asia Oceania
Non-OECD
E. Europe/Eurasia

Change

CAAGR*

0.9

0.5

0.6

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

0.4

2.4%

20.8

29.4

29.0

28.3

27.9

27.7

27.0

-2.5

-0.3%

8.2

14.2

14.2

14.0

13.6

13.1

12.1

-2.1

-0.6%

Kazakhstan

0.7

1.7

2.1

2.4

2.6

2.6

2.6

0.9

1.7%

Russia

6.5

11.1

10.9

10.5

9.8

9.3

8.5

-2.6

-1.1%

5.6

7.2

6.6

6.3

6.0

5.8

5.6

-1.7

-1.0%

Asia
China

3.3

4.4

3.9

3.7

3.4

3.3

3.2

-1.2

-1.3%

India

0.8

0.9

0.8

0.9

0.9

0.9

0.9

-0.0

-0.1%

Middle East

2.2

1.3

1.2

1.2

1.2

1.2

1.0

-0.2

-0.8%

Africa

1.6

2.1

2.1

1.8

2.0

1.8

1.7

-0.4

-0.9%

Latin America

3.2

4.6

4.8

4.9

5.2

5.8

6.5

1.9

1.4%

0.9

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.7

0.7

0.8

0.1

0.8%

Argentina

1.3

2.6

3.1

3.4

3.7

4.4

5.1

2.6

2.8%

Total non-OPEC

Brazil

42.5

53.2

54.3

54.4

54.2

53.8

52.4

-0.8

-0.1%

Non-OPEC share

57%

58%

58%

57%

56%

54%

52%

-5%

n.a.

Conventional

41.6

45.5

44.8

43.6

42.5

41.2

39.8

-5.6

-0.5%

Crude oil

35.5

36.5

35.0

33.2

31.6

30.1

29.0

-7.5

-0.9%

Natural gas liquids

6.1

9.0

9.8

10.4

10.8

11.1

10.9

1.9

0.8%

Unconventional

1.0

7.7

9.5

10.8

11.7

12.6

12.5

4.8

2.0%

-

4.6

5.7

6.7

7.2

7.5

6.8

2.1

1.5%

Canada oil sands

0.6

2.4

3.1

3.2

3.3

3.5

3.8

1.4

1.9%

Coal-to-liquids

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.7

0.6

8.4%

Gas-to-liquids

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.4

11.1%

Tight oil

© OECD/IEA, 2016

* Compound average annual growth rate.

A trend exhibited by a number of major non-OPEC countries is growth in production to
2020, given the considerable levels of investment before the fall in oil prices, followed
by a more moderate period of growth as the investment cuts in 2015 and 2016 begin to
take effect. For example, there have been multiple postponements or cancellations of new
upstream projects in Canada and in consequence, production in 2040 has been revised
downwards by over 700 kb/d from WEO-2015. While production grows by nearly 700 kb/d
over the next five years, over the following 15 years the increase is less than 500 kb/d.
136

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

Brazil also suffers from a significant downward revision compared with WEO-2015. Despite
growth of over 500 kb/d between 2015 and 2020, increases over the longer term are
much more subdued as a result of the investment delays implemented by Petrobras. Other
companies are increasing investment, but Petrobras remains the dominant operator in
Brazil’s deepwater fields. It had spent aggressively to develop projects in the emerging
pre-salt Santos basin, but this involved taking on more than $130 billion in debt (for
comparison, ExxonMobil, the world’s largest publicly traded oil company, has debt of
around $40 billion). For the past two years Petrobras has been plagued by cost over-runs
and, along with government officials and suppliers, enmeshed in a financial scandal. In
parallel with the extended drop in oil prices, these issues have put at risk the ability of
Petrobras to reduce its debt. As a result, after multiple revisions the company’s latest fiveyear capital budget covering the period from 2017 to 2021 is $74 billion; a sharp reduction
from the $235 billion that had been planned for the five-year period from 2012 to 2016.
Foreign investment over the medium term, while potentially significant, is unlikely to fully
compensate for these cuts. Our longer-term outlook for Brazil, though, is more upbeat:
production exceeds 5 mb/d by 2040, a projection based on the high quality of Brazil’s
resource, crude prices sufficient to attract new investment and an anticipated easing of the
policy and supply chain issues that have limited production growth in recent years.
Among other non-OPEC producers, aggregate production falls steadily to 2040. Declines
in mature basins, especially the North Sea and China, are only partially offset by growth in
Australia, which sees increases in NGL and unconventional oil production, and Mexico.14

OPEC production
Given the growth foreseen in non-OPEC production up to 2020, OPEC production in the
New Policies Scenario initially increases at a much slower pace than that seen in recent
years. Between 2000 and 2015, OPEC production grew on average by nearly 450 kb/d yearon-year. This falls to less than 50 kb/d between 2015 and 2020, although thereafter the
pace of growth picks up as non-OPEC production stagnates and then enters decline. OPEC’s
share of global oil production approaches 50% by 2040.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

OPEC members outside the Middle East endured a difficult 2015: ongoing economic and
political turmoil in Venezuela, violence in Libya and falls in revenues for African producers
weighed heavily on many of these countries. Only Angola registered any notable increase
in production between 2014 and 2015 (up 100 kb/d), as a result of projects coming
onstream that were approved before the oil price crash, while production in the other
African members of OPEC collectively was down by over 170 kb/d. Indonesia and Gabon rejoined OPEC in 2016, adding just over 1 mb/d to total OPEC production in the base year.15

14. For further details, see Mexico Energy Outlook: World Energy Outlook Special Report, 2016. Available at:
www.worldenergyoutlook.org/mexico.
15. We add production from Indonesia and Gabon to the whole historical record of OPEC for consistency over time.

Chapter 3 | Oil market outlook

137

3

The outlook for Libya and Venezuela remains particularly uncertain. Estimates of
production in both countries have been revised down since WEO-2015. We do assume
some stabilisation and recovery over the long term, but neither country manages to surpass
previous peaks in production before 2040. Production in Angola falls to 1.5 mb/d in 2020,
but then remains on a plateau around this level to 2040. Nigerian production eventually
recovers from a similar dip over the next five years to grow by over 500 kb/d between 2020
and 2040, as the rise in oil prices eventually spurs a new wave of deepwater developments.
Meanwhile, neither Indonesia nor Gabon has high untapped potential and their production
falls to under 600 kb/d by 2040 (Table 3.7).
Table 3.7 ⊳ OPEC oil production in the New Policies Scenario (mb/d)

2015-2040

2000

2015

2020

2025

2030

2035

2040

21.3

28.7

30.4

32.3

33.4

35.0

36.9

8.2

Iran

3.8

3.6

4.8

5.1

5.3

5.6

5.9

2.3

2.0%

Iraq

2.6

4.1

4.5

5.2

5.7

6.3

7.1

3.0

2.2%

Middle East

Change CAAGR*
1.0%

Kuwait

2.2

3.1

3.1

3.1

3.2

3.3

3.5

0.4

0.5%

Qatar

0.9

2.0

1.9

2.0

2.1

2.3

2.5

0.5

0.9%

Saudi Arabia

9.3

12.2

12.4

12.9

13.1

13.4

13.7

1.5

0.5%

United Arab Emirates

2.6

3.7

3.7

4.0

4.0

4.2

4.3

0.5

0.5%

11.2

10.4

8.8

9.0

9.5

10.1

11.2

0.8

0.3%

Non-Middle East
Algeria

1.4

1.6

1.4

1.4

1.4

1.4

1.5

-0.1

-0.3%

Angola

0.7

1.8

1.5

1.5

1.5

1.5

1.6

-0.3

-0.6%

Ecuador

0.4

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.3

-0.2

-2.3%

Gabon

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

-0.2

-4.7%

Indonesia

1.4

0.8

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

-0.3

-1.9%

Libya

1.5

0.4

0.4

0.6

1.0

1.3

1.6

1.1

5.2%

Nigeria

2.2

2.3

2.0

2.1

2.2

2.3

2.5

0.2

0.3%

Venezuela

3.2

2.6

2.3

2.3

2.5

2.7

3.2

0.6

0.8%

Total OPEC

32.5

39.1

39.2

41.3

42.9

45.1

48.1

9.0

0.8%

OPEC share

43%

42%

42%

43%

44%

46%

48%

5%

n.a.

Conventional

32.2

38.3

38.2

40.0

41.2

43.0

45.3

6.9

0.7%

Crude oil

29.3

31.8

31.4

32.4

32.8

33.9

35.6

3.7

0.4%

Natural gas liquids

3.0

6.5

6.8

7.6

8.4

9.1

9.7

3.2

1.6%

Unconventional

0.3

0.8

1.0

1.3

1.7

2.2

2.8

2.1

5.4%

0.2

0.4

0.7

0.9

1.2

1.5

2.0

1.6

6.3%

-

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.2

3.2%

Venezuela extra-heavy
Gas-to-liquids

* Compound average annual growth rate.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Note: Data for Saudi Arabia and Kuwait include 50% each of production from the Neutral Zone.

In contrast, members of OPEC in the Middle East have enjoyed a recent surge in production,
led by Iraq (up 660 kb/d in 2015), Saudi Arabia (up 500 kb/d), the United Arab Emirates (up
160 kb/d) and Iran (up 150 kb/d, with large further increases in 2016). Given the differing
138

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

circumstances of OPEC members, Middle Eastern countries are on the verge of providing
three-quarters of OPEC production, the first time this will have occurred in the history of
OPEC. The Middle East’s share of OPEC production continues to rise in our projections, with
most new capacity in the New Policies Scenario coming from Iraq, Iran and Saudi Arabia.
In Saudi Arabia, oil accounts for around three-quarters of both exports by value and
revenue for the central government (IMF, 2016). Although the country has accumulated
large financial reserves, the economy has still suffered from the drop in oil prices: the
value of exports fell by $140 billion in 2015 while the budget deficit rose to 16% of GDP,
a notable reversal from a 6% surplus in 2013. Saudi Arabia’s remaining recoverable oil
resources are vast, at just under 400 billion barrels, and could support greater growth than
the 1.5 mb/d increase seen in the New Policies Scenario between 2015 and 2040 (broadly
in line with the growth seen in WEO-2015). But with the expected reversion to a strategy in
which OPEC countries modulate output, large additional volumes are not required. Saudi
Aramco, nonetheless, needs to spend significant sums each year maintaining production
levels from existing fields and sustaining its estimated 1.5 to 2.0 mb/d of spare capacity. In
our projections, Saudi Arabia maintains its pre-eminence among OPEC producers and its
central role in global oil markets, even though Iran and Iraq enjoy a greater level of growth
over the timeframe of the New Policies Scenario.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Iraq has remaining technically recoverable resources that stand at over 200 billion barrels
and posted the biggest output gain in 2015 among OPEC members. But, given current
security problems, institutional weaknesses and investment cuts, this paints a misleading
picture of future growth potential. The growth in Iraqi production in 2015 was built upon
capital investments made during the period of relative stability, between 2012 and 2014.
This growth was split fairly evenly between fields controlled by the federal government,
located in the south of the country and those controlled by the Kurdistan Regional
Government in the north. The reduction in revenues accompanying the fall in oil prices
has been almost entirely shouldered by the federal and regional governments. As a result,
multiple payments to upstream operators in both areas have been missed. Given their
failure to receive payment for past expenditure, particularly against the backdrop of the
industry-wide fall in investment, companies are cutting back on future development plans.
The effects of declining oil revenues on the Iraqi state and economy have been profoundly
destabilising.
Because of its myriad problems, projected Iraqi production in the New Policies Scenario is
moving closer to the low or “delayed” case, rather than to the central pathway, discussed
in the special focus on Iraq in WEO-2012. If the security situation can be resolved and
investment re-started, there is considerable upside potential to the outlook for Iraqi
production. However, since the growth in the New Policies Scenario already relies upon
significant growth in investment levels from those seen currently, and given the absence
of any prolonged period of stability for oil markets in the country since the 1990s, it would
appear prudent not to rely on major gains in Iraqi production above those in the New
Policies Scenario. Production in 2040 reaches 7.1 mb/d, some 750 kb/d lower than in
WEO-2015.
Chapter 3 | Oil market outlook

139

3

The agreement reached over its nuclear programme has meant that sanctions in Iran were
lifted in January 2016. This provided a swift boost to Iranian supply of around 700 kb/d,
bringing production back to levels similar to those before the 2012 sanctions were imposed.
This bounce back was based upon restarting existing capacity and has been towards the
upper level of expectations. The question now is whether the Iranian oil sector can fulfil
the production potential implied by its vast resource base (estimated at over 200 billion
barrels). The speed and level at which new investment can be mobilised to raise production
capacity are critical, but on this point developments have been relatively slow.
Figure 3.10 ⊳ Change in Iraq and Iran oil production in the
mb/d

New Policies Scenario

2.0

40%

1.5

30%

1.0

20%

0.5

10%

0

0%

Iran
Iraq
Share of total
OPEC production
(right axis)

-0.5
-1.0

20002005

20052010

20102015

20152020

20202025

20252030

20302035

20352040

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Iran’s production growth slows after a post-sanction boost,
while increases to Iraqi production emerge more steadily

The general terms of a new Iran Petroleum Contract (IPC) have been announced, but
there have been repeated delays in issuing the specific details regarding remuneration and
terms for operators. The IPC is expected to replace the buyback contracts and some of
the largest Iranian oil fields are likely to be put up for offer (in partnership with selected
Iranian companies). Nevertheless, in the current low price environment, Iran is competing
with numerous other countries for a diminished level of private investment: Mexico and
Brazil, not to mention the United States and Canada, have relatively attractive investment
climates that could lure foreign capital away from Iran if the terms there are not sufficiently
appealing. Under the New Policies Scenario, Iranian production exceeds 5 mb/d by 2025
and reaches 5.9 mb/d in 2040 (Figure 3.10). This is a 500 kb/d increase on the 2040
projection from WEO-2015, reflecting the brighter investment prospects now that sanctions
have been removed. There is certainly further upside potential, but building confidence in
political stability and a stable regulatory environment are essential to its realisation and
are likely to take time.
140

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

3.3.3 Refining
While bad news for upstream operators, the collapse in oil prices brought some welcome
relief to refiners. Margins reached multi-year highs as refiners benefited from cheaper
feedstocks and managed to avoid reducing wholesale product prices to a commensurate
extent. Even the European refining sector, on a structural decline trend for at least a decade,
as decreased local demand and competition from export-oriented refiners weighed heavily
on utilisation rates, enjoyed a sudden boom. Around a third of the near 2 mb/d global
throughput increase in 2015 came from refineries in Europe.
However, these higher margins might have already sown the seeds of their own destruction.
Refinery enthusiasm for higher throughput was not well-matched with demand and so,
even though oil demand growth in 2015 was the fastest in a decade (excluding 2010’s
post-recession recovery), it still was insufficient to absorb all incremental product output.
In addition, some of the increased demand in recent years for petrochemical feedstocks
has been met by NGL products, such as ethane and LPG. These are products that largely
bypass the refining sector. Refined product stocks increased throughout 2014 and 2015
and started putting pressure on the margins at the beginning of 2016. Refiners in Europe
have, as a result, already been forced to start retreating from the high throughput rates
seen in 2015.
Table 3.8 ⊳ World liquids demand in the New Policies Scenario (mb/d)
Total liquids

2015

2020

2025

2030

2035

2040

94.1

97.9

100.8

102.8

105.3

107.7

Biofuels*

1.6

2.0

2.5

3.0

3.6

4.2

Total oil

92.5

95.9

98.2

99.8

101.7

103.5

CTL, GTL and additives

0.9

1.0

1.2

1.6

2.0

2.5

Direct use of crude oil

1.1

0.8

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

90.5

94.0

96.4

97.7

99.3

100.7

Oil products

8.8

9.5

10.0

10.4

10.7

10.6

Refinery products

Fractionation products from NGLs

81.6

84.6

86.4

87.3

88.6

90.1

Refinery products share

87%

86%

86%

85%

84%

84%

* Expressed in energy-equivalent volumes of gasoline and diesel. CTL = coal-to-liquids; GTL = gas-to-liquids.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

It is not just the European refining sector that experienced this cycle, and the tale of
refining sector exuberance in 2015 and subsequent cool-down illustrates the perennial
challenges facing refiners globally. Given the huge over capacity in the system, neither a
supply-related slump in crude oil prices, nor a period of robust demand pushing up product
prices, can provide elevated margins for refiners indefinitely. Looking forward, the headline
oil demand growth rates also distort the picture for refiners, as NGL fractionation and other
non-refined products claim increasingly higher market shares (Table 3.8).
Global refining capacity grows in the New Policies Scenario by over 16 mb/d by 2040
(Table 3.9). The refinery throughput of the Middle East doubles, as countries aim to satisfy
both rapidly growing domestic refined product demand, which increases by 1.3% compared
Chapter 3 | Oil market outlook

141

3

with 0.4% globally, and export markets. India and China are expected to become net refined
product importers, despite throughput gains of 3 mb/d and 4 mb/d respectively.
Companies both from oil exporting regions, such as the Middle East and Russia, and from
major refining centres, such as Japan and Korea, are expected to start looking abroad for
downstream partnerships to expand their businesses. This search for growing markets
eventually brings them to sub-Saharan Africa, where the extent of the deficit in transport
fuels justifies new refining investments, albeit towards the later part of the projection
period. At the same time, some refining capacity elsewhere will become redundant, due to
lower demand and refinery runs. Almost 15 mb/d of capacity is at risk of closure by 2040,
with Europe accounting for a third of the total.
Table 3.9 ⊳ Refining capacity and runs by region in the
New Policies Scenario (mb/d)

2015

Net capacity
change to
2040

2015

2025

2040

2025

2040

North America

21.3

-0.3

19.3

18.2

16.0

0.8

3.7

Europe

16.5

-1.2

13.7

11.8

10.0

2.7

4.8

Asia

31.7

10.3

27.3

30.0

35.2

2.1

2.9

7.6

-0.9

6.8

5.8

4.8

0.5

1.6

12.8

4.9

10.8

12.6

14.8

1.2

0.9

Capacity

OECD Asia Oceania
China

Refinery runs

Capacity at risk

India

4.4

3.4

4.6

5.3

7.6

-

-

Southeast Asia

5.0

2.6

4.0

4.8

6.6

0.1

0.1

Russia

6.2

0.1

5.5

4.9

4.6

0.7

1.0

Middle East

8.8

4.3

6.4

10.1

11.6

0.3

0.3
0.5

Africa

3.3

1.7

2.1

3.1

4.1

0.6

Brazil

2.1

0.8

2.0

2.3

2.7

-

-

Other

4.9

0.5

3.4

3.7

3.5

1.1

1.5

World

94.8

16.1

79.7

84.1

87.6

8.3

14.7

Atlantic Basin

53.8

1.5

45.5

43.6

40.4

5.9

11.5

East of Suez

41.0

14.6

34.2

40.6

47.2

2.5

3.2

Notes: “Capacity at risk” is defined for each region as the difference between refinery capacity, on the one hand, and
refinery runs, on the other, with the latter including a 14% allowance for downtime. This is always smaller than the spare
capacity, which is the difference between capacity and refinery runs. All the publicly announced future shutdown plans
are already netted off the refining capacity total in the relevant years.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

3.3.4 Trade
The Middle East is set to increase its market share in international crude oil exports, but
the most notable changes occur among the ranks of importers (Figure 3.11). The largest of
these is in North America, which not only disappears from the list of crude oil importers,
but becomes an important exporter of crude oil (2.5 mb/d by 2040). This change arises
142

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

both because of the rise in tight oil production in the United States, and because imports
into the US Gulf Coast refining system are offset by projected exports of Mexican and
Canadian crudes.
By 2040, China and India together import nearly half of internationally traded crude oil, up
from just over 25% today. With 2040 crude oil imports projected at 12 mb/d, China alone
is expected to import more crude oil than any country ever has in the past. These parallel
developments put trade chokepoints into the spotlight again, as the substantially growing
“call on Hormuz” is matched by an increase in traffic through the Malacca Straits on the
way to China and other parts of Asia. If the current flows, of both crude oil and oil products,
out of the Middle East or into Asia are not modified through land-based infrastructure
or alternative sea routes, both of these straits could see 3-5 mb/d of incremental traffic
volume. Geopolitical issues aside, this may result in operational safety issues due to
congestion.
In oil products trade, non-refined products (ethane, LPG and naphtha) account for a third
of some 3 mb/d growth in trade volumes, predominantly flowing from the United States
and the Middle East to South America and Asia. Due to regional demand patterns and
refinery configurations, west to east flows continue to be dominated by either light or
heavy products, while it is the middle distillates that flow in the opposite direction.
Figure 3.11 ⊳ Crude oil trade in major regions in the New Policies Scenario

2015

Middle East

2040

Africa
South America
Russia
North America
Caspian
OECD Asia Oceania
Southeast Asia
India
European Union
China

© OECD/IEA, 2016

-15

-10

-5

0

5

10

15

20

25
mb/d

By 2040, China and India import nearly half of all internationally traded crude oil,
Middle East firms its market share, while North America becomes a net exporter

Chapter 3 | Oil market outlook

143

3

3.4 Investment trends and risks
The annual level of investment into upstream oil and gas projects that is necessary in
the New Policies Scenario worldwide is $700 billion (Table 3.10).16 This figure takes into
account changes in the complexity and geography of the projects that are executed, how
the Upstream Investment Cost Index will evolve over time (Spotlight) and the volumes of
new oil and gas resources that are developed between 2016 and 2040. The investment
figure is a reduction from the level in WEO-2015 ($750 billion per year), because lower
oil prices in early years pull down upstream costs, a lower proportion of supply comes
from high cost areas (such as Brazil and Canada) and because a higher tight oil and shale
gas resource base means the average cost of what is produced is lower. Of the $17 trillion
cumulative upstream investment between 2016 and 2040, three-quarters occurs in nonOPEC countries, with spending growing gradually over time to 2040.
Table 3.10 ⊳ Cumulative oil and gas supply investment by region in the
New Policies Scenario, 2016-2040 ($2015 billion)

Oil

Gas

OECD

8 195

6 469

147

1 209

369

259

Americas

6 022

5 038

120

669

194

202

Canada

1 168

989

39

104

36

40

United States

4 100

3 404

54

508

134

136

1 514

1 066

14

317

118

43

659

364

13

223

58

15

504

345

11

141

5

14

14 202

11 020

572

1 695

914

441

3 113

2 543

62

433

76

102

Asia Oceania
Australia
Non-OECD
E. Europe/Eurasia

Refining
oil

Annual average
upstream
oil and gas

Upstream
oil and gas

Europe

Caspian

1 089

972

26

77

14

39

Russia

1 841

1 470

32

287

53

59

3 357

2 120

88

588

561

85

China

1 580

1 152

30

270

129

46

India

533

217

27

98

191

9

Southeast Asia

934

609

23

127

174

24

Middle East

3 315

2 625

240

358

92

105

Africa

2 199

1 817

90

195

97

73

Latin America

2 219

1 915

93

122

88

77

1 090

948

60

49

32

38

440

n.a.

325

115

n.a.

-

22 836

17 489

1 045

3 019

1 283

700

Non-OPEC

n.a.

13 140

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

526

OPEC

n.a.

4 349

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

174

Asia

Brazil
Shipping
World

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Transport

Total
oil and gas

16. The upstream figure is combined here for oil and gas because of the crossover between investments for associated
gas that takes place at oil fields and for NGLs at gas fields.
144

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

The New Policies Scenario carries the important assumption that oil markets reach a stable
equilibrium. Prices reach the level required to stimulate sufficient investment into new
sources of production to replace the ever present decline from currently producing projects
and to satisfy demand growth. As a result of the drop in oil prices, however, upstream
investment in 2015 fell to less than $600 billion and is set to fall to around $450 billion in
2016 (IEA, 2016c). While the drop in activity has been less dramatic (since costs have also
declined) these investment levels are still well below what is required in the New Policies
Scenario.
This highlights the possibility that oil markets could enter a prolonged period of suppressed
upstream investments, which could lead to severe disruption. If insufficient new oil projects
are developed to meet the rising demand levels in the New Policies Scenario, this would be
likely to fuel a period of heightened price volatility. Alternatively, if vigorous climate policies
were pursued so as to shift the trajectory of oil demand sharply downwards, a period of
low upstream investment now could match supply to the lower market requirement, saving
investors from the risk that some upstream investments might never pay off, becoming
stranded assets. These two contrasting situations are explored in detail below, looking first
at the levels of new project approvals necessary to meet the rising demand levels of the
New Policies Scenario, and then examining the issue of possible stranded upstream assets
in the 450 Scenario.

3.4.1 Upstream investment needs: mind the gap?

© OECD/IEA, 2016

What impact has the drop in investment already experienced had on supply prospects? The
level of oil reserves in projects in which production began in 2015 was just over 16 billion
barrels (excluding tight oil). This was a drop on the level in 2014, but was not severely
below the longer term average of around 20 billion barrels in the 2000-2015 period. This is
not surprising. The complexity of upstream projects means that capital commitments are
made and substantial sums spent well in advance of production beginning. Even if prices
drop below the level necessary for full cost recovery – and are expected to stay low –
as long as the revenue from anticipated production is expected to cover the remaining
expenditure required, development will continue.
The same is not true for projects that have yet to be committed, meaning that they have yet
to receive their final investment decision. Operators might well decide to delay or cancel
expenditure on projects or activities into which little or no capital has yet been committed.
For example, as mentioned in section 3.3.2, exploration expenditure fell by around 30%
between 2014 and 2015, and discoveries dropped to a 70-year low (IEA, 2016c). What
is more, the total level of resources in conventional crude oil fields that were given
development approval in 2015 fell to the lowest amount sanctioned in a single year since
the 1950s (Figure 3.12).17 The volumes expected to be sanctioned over the course of 2016
are likely to remain at this suppressed level.
17. The spike in 2009 resulted from three of the super-giant fields in Iraq receiving re-development approval.

Chapter 3 | Oil market outlook

145

3

Against this background, we investigate below what levels of new approvals will be
necessary to ensure that there is no mismatch between supply and demand in the New
Policies Scenario. We start by examining the extent of decline in production from fields that
are currently producing. We next add any new production issuing from new fields whose
development is already committed and then compare this net total output with the level
of demand growth seen in the New Policies Scenario. Any gap between these projections
represents production that must come from new projects that have yet to receive approval,
including fields that may yet be discovered, if demand is to be satisfied without substantial
and sudden changes to the oil price.

Billion barrels

Figure 3.12 ⊳ Conventional crude oil resources receiving approval worldwide
60
50
40
30
20
10

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2015

Resources in conventional crude oil projects receiving approval fell to historic lows in 2015
Source: IEA analysis based on Rystad Energy.

Estimating the 2025 supply-demand gap

© OECD/IEA, 2016

In order to build up the picture of future global supply prospects, it is first useful to
distinguish between fields at different stages of their development and maturity. Here we
differentiate, and assess separately, three distinct groups of conventional crude oil fields:


Post-peak fields: fields that have passed their peak in production. These provided just
over 50% of total oil production in 2015.



Legacy fields: fields that have not yet exhibited any clear decline because they were
subject to above-ground constraints or events that reduced their production in the
past, and so might continue to produce at, or around, their peak level for some years to
come. These constraints could be because of production limitations to meet previous
OPEC quota requirements, or political or commercial events, such as the break-up of
the Soviet Union. We define these fields as those in which first production occurred
prior to 2000 but that had yet to display any clear decline in production by 2015. These
fields cover 8% of total oil production.

146

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends



Ramp-up fields: fields that have been brought online since 2000 in which production
has yet to peak (15% total oil production in 2015).

The remainder of global oil production in 2015 came from NGLs (17%) and unconventional
oil (9%), including a minor contribution from coal-to-liquids, gas-to-liquids and additives
(1%).
The rate at which production is expected to decline from the post-peak fields in the first
category was examined in detail in WEO-2013. We revisit some of that analysis here. A
decline rate refers to the percentage reduction in actual production from an individual
field or a group of fields over time. It can vary widely from field to field, according to their
size, maturity, location, geology and development strategy. When measuring the average
decline rate for a group of fields, it is useful to distinguish between the post-peak decline
rate which refers to the decline from a collection of fields that have passed their peak,
and the overall decline rate, which refers to the decline in production from all currently
producing fields, including those that have yet to peak. These observed decline rates
are distinct from, and smaller than, natural decline rates, which are the rates at which
production would decline in the absence of any additional capital investment.
Our updated detailed field-by-field decline rate analysis indicates that the current global
average post-peak decline rate in 2015, weighted by each field’s cumulative production, is
around 6.2%. The global natural decline rate is much higher, at just under 9%,18 highlighting
the importance of ongoing investment into these conventional post-peak fields to avoid
precipitous drops in production.
Figure 3.13 ⊳ Loss of oil production from post-peak fields resulting from the
drop in investment in 2015

2015

2020

2025

2030

2035

2040

Africa
Asia

- 100

Europe*

Change in production (kb/d)

Latin America
- 200

Middle East
North America
Russia and Caspian

- 300
- 400
- 500

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Decline in investment in post-peak fields in 2015
results in nearly 450 kb/d production loss by 2020
*Contains OECD Europe and other Eastern Europe countries
18. These observed post-peak and natural decline rates are in close alignment with those from WEO-2013.

Chapter 3 | Oil market outlook

147

3

Investment in post-peak conventional crude oil fields in 2015, however, fell in nominal
terms by around a quarter from the levels seen in 2013 and 2014. This is greater than the
average 15% decline seen in capital costs (Figure 3.6), and so their observed decline rates
have increased slightly towards the natural decline rate. This results in a loss in production
of close to 450 kb/d by 2020 (Figure 3.13). If investment in these fields were to continue
to remain suppressed, then the observed decline rates would trend further towards the
natural decline rates and the impact on production would be greater. The New Policies
Scenario assumes that investment rebounds, and, on that basis, we estimate that global
production from post-peak fields will fall from just over 47 mb/d in 2015 to 29 mb/d by
2025.19
Legacy fields, those fields that came online before 2000 but that have yet to exhibit any
clear decline, comprise only 3% of existing conventional crude oil fields. But they represent
a disproportionately large amount of oil production globally, two-thirds of which occurs in
states which are members of OPEC or in Russia. The above-ground constraints or events to
which they were subject make it is hard to identify whether decline has yet commenced
in these fields or when they might enter decline. The historic behaviour of approximately
5 000 post-peak fields, that had at least 10 million barrels of reserves and that are now
clearly in decline, can help in this regard. This suggests that the ratio of cumulative
production to initial reserves for fields (the cumulative depletion rate) is a useful metric for
estimating when production will peak and pass through the subsequent stages of decline.
A field is most likely to reach peak production once cumulative depletion reaches around
30%. It will drop below 85% of this peak (the end of the plateau phase) once around 50%
is depleted; and the final stage of decline (50% below peak production) will occur once
depletion reaches around 80%. As with the post-peak group of fields, the decline rates
of the fields in this category also depend upon future investment rates. Based on the
price and investment trends of the New Policies Scenario and assuming that fields in this
category continue at current levels of production until they reach the above levels of
depletion, we estimate that production from these fields will fall from 7.8 mb/d in 2015 to
5.1 mb/d by 2025.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Another type of field active in 2015 is those that commenced production recently and in
which production is still growing. Obviously most investment in such fields occurred over
the past few years, and between 2010 and 2015 such expenditure (in both conventional
and unconventional projects) varied significantly from country to country, reflecting the
nature and development stage of the resource base (Figure 3.14). For example, 70% of
investment in the United States into new projects was for tight oil projects, over threequarters of investment in Canada was for oil sands projects, while in Saudi Arabia and
Mexico the majority of expenditure was for shallow offshore fields.

19. This drop in production cannot be calculated simply by multiplying the 2015 observed decline rate by current
production. Decline rates are not stationary in time: as fields mature they enter later phases of decline, at different rates,
while the contribution of different fields to the overall regional decline rate also changes over time.
148

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

Figure 3.14 ⊳ Capital investment into oil project types starting between
2010 and 2015 by selected country

World
Onshore

Russia
China
Nigeria
United States
Canada
Saudi Arabia
Mexico
Brazil
Angola
Norway

3

Shallow water
Deepwater
Ultra-deepwater
Tight oil
Extra-heavy oil
and bitumen
Arctic

20%

40%

60%

80%

100%

The new project types that received investment over the past five years vary widely
Notes: Shallow water fields have water depths less than 400 metres, deepwater fields between 400-2 000 metres and
ultra-deepwater fields greater than 2 000 metres.
Source: IEA analysis based on Rystad Energy.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

For these different types of projects, there is wide variation in the interval between when
they are first approved, when they commence production, the rate at which they ramp up,
their peak level of production and their subsequent decline. Some commence production
very soon after approval if, for example, they are close to existing infrastructure, while others
will be subject to multiple delays and have slow growth rates. For example, as discussed,
the deepwater pre-salt projects in Brazil draw on a huge resource base but are extremely
complex. We estimate that output from these pre-salt projects that recently commenced
production, or are expected to do so soon, will reach its maximum level around ten years
after first approval. In contrast, shallow offshore fields in the North Sea generally achieve
maximum production fewer than seven years after approval. The profile of onshore fields
in Russia is steadier than both of these, and is characterised by a slower ramp up and lower
level of peak production but a less steep decline after peaking (Figure 3.15).
Production from conventional crude oil projects in their ramp-up phase is projected to grow
from 13.4 mb/d to 15.7 mb/d between 2015 and 2018. However, these fields subsequently
enter decline, and so, even with the ongoing capital investment that takes place in the
New Policies Scenario, aggregate production falls by 2.9 mb/d from current levels by 2025.
Summing together the contribution of the various groups of conventional crude oil fields,
production falls by 23.7 mb/d over the ten-year period to 2025. The importance of this
decline should not be overlooked: it is equivalent to losing the entire oil output of Iraq
every two years.

Chapter 3 | Oil market outlook

149

Depletion rate*

Figure 3.15 ⊳ Rates of production after approval for various project types
10%

North Sea (shallow oﬀshore)
8%
6%
4%
Brazil (pre-salt)

Russia (onshore)

2%

0

5

10

15

20

25
30
Years after approval

Following approval, production from Russian onshore projects
grows more slowly than Brazilian pre-salt and North Sea projects
* The depletion rate is the ratio of annual production to a fixed estimate of its reserves, i.e. the percentage of initial
reserves produced each year.

Resource and investment requirements
The necessary level of future conventional crude oil approvals needs to take into account
both future demand growth and increases from other production sources. Between 2015
and 2025, unconventional sources of production, NGLs and processing gains together grow
by just over 6.5 mb/d in the New Policies Scenario (Table 3.11). Further, in 2015 there is an
excess of supply over demand, representing a build-up of stocks (estimated to be around
2 mb/d, although this figure is quite uncertain).20 Subtracting these from the 23.7 mb/d
drop in production from currently producing conventional crude oil fields results in a
15.2 mb/d gap that needs to be filled by new projects, just to keep supply in 2025 equal to
current levels. To this must be added the 5.7 mb/d growth in demand in the New Policies
Scenario over this period. This implies a gap of 20.9 mb/d in 2025.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

The first contribution to filling this gap comes from those projects that have already been
approved but that had not started production prior to 2016, since they were not yet
included in the analysis. The IEA Medium-Term Oil Market Outlook (IEA, 2016d) provides
detailed data on such projects and we estimate that by 2025 they will add around 5 mb/d,
having collectively peaked in 2021 (Table 3.11). Subtracting this yields a gap of 15.9 mb/d in
2025 that must be filled by conventional crude oil projects that have yet to receive approval
(Figure 3.16). If there is a continued shortfall in customary levels of investment in post-peak
fields, production declines will accelerate and this gap will expand.
20. Some of the reported excess of supply over demand in the base year could also be a result of timing differences or
misreporting of supply and demand figures, and unreported or misstated stock changes (IEA, 2016e).
150

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

Table 3.11 ⊳ World oil supply by type in the New Policies Scenario (mb/d)
2015-2040

2000

2015

2020

2025

2030

2035

2040

Conventional production

73.8

83.8

83.0

83.6

83.7

84.1

85.1

1.3

0.1%

Crude oil

64.8

68.3

66.4

65.5

64.5

64.0

64.5

-3.8

-0.2%

64.8

68.3

57.0

44.6

35.4

28.2

22.8

-45.5

-4.3%

Post-peak fields

n.a.

47.1

36.1

29.0

23.6

19.3

16.2

-30.9

-4.2%

Legacy fields

n.a.

7.8

6.3

5.1

4.1

3.2

2.5

-5.3

-4.4%

Existing fields

Fields in ramp-up

Change

CAAGR*

-

13.4

14.6

10.5

7.8

5.7

4.0

-9.4

-4.7%

Approved and not
producing

-

-

5.8

5.0

3.2

2.2

1.4

1.4

n.a.

Yet-to-be-approved

-

-

3.5

15.9

25.8

33.6

40.3

40.3

n.a.

Yet-to-be-found

-

-

-

2.9

6.6

10.5

14.5

14.5

n.a.

Natural gas liquids

9.0

15.5

16.6

18.0

19.2

20.2

20.6

5.1

1.1%

Unconventional production

1.2

8.4

10.5

12.1

13.4

14.7

15.3

6.9

2.4%

Tight oil
Extra-heavy oil and bitumen
Total production
Processing gains**
Supply***

-

4.6

5.7

6.7

7.2

7.6

6.8

2.2

1.6%

0.8

2.8

3.8

4.2

4.5

5.1

5.9

3.1

3.0%

75.1

92.3

93.5

95.7

97.1

98.9 100.5

8.2

0.3%

1.8

2.2

2.4

2.5

76.9

94.5

95.9

98.2

3.0

0.8

1.2%

99.8 101.7 103.5

2.7

2.9

9.0

0.4%

* Compound average annual growth rate. ** Volume increases in supply that occur during crude oil refining.
*** Differences between historical supply and demand volumes are due to changes in stocks.

Figure 3.16 ⊳ Global supply outlook from selected sources in the
mb/d

New Policies Scenario

New Policies Scenario demand

100
80
60
40

Other
Tight oil
EHOB
NGLs
Approved
Ramp-up
Legacy
Post-peak

20

© OECD/IEA, 2016

2015

2020

2025

A supply-demand gap emerges that must be filled by production from
conventional crude oil projects yet-to-be-approved
Note: Other includes coal-to-liquids, gas-to-liquids, additives and processing gains.

Chapter 3 | Oil market outlook

151

3

As discussed, production increases at different rates in various projects (Figure 3.15). We
can use such profiles to explore what level of resources would need to be approved each
year to fill the gap between supply and demand. For example, taking into account the
reduction in investment and project approvals in 2015, on the assumption that an equal
amount of resources are approved each year, then about 16 billion barrels need to be
approved annually from 2016 to 2025 to fill the 2025 gap. This level of approvals remains
below the average level that occurred from around the mid-2000s (Figure 3.17).
Extending the assumed period of low investment further in time heightens the subsequent
necessary levels of approvals. During this extended period of suppressed investments, we
assume that annual approval levels stay at 6.5 billion barrels (as was the case in 2015)
and that there are further losses in production from the lack of investment in post-peak
fields. Following the downturn, equal volumes are approved in each subsequent year. We
find that with two years of suppressed investment, the annual amount that must then
be approved between 2017 and 2025 rises to 18 billion barrels/year. Given the low level
of approvals seen so far in 2016, this is likely the current state of play. If this is situation
continues into 2017, i.e. with three consecutive years of suppressed investments, the
amount that subsequently needs to be approved every year between 2018 and 2025 rises
to just under 21 billion barrels/year. That exceeds any average level seen since the 1970s.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

If such a level of conventional crude oil project approvals were not to materialise to 2025,
then oil prices would need to rise to reduce demand and/or yield greater quantities of
alternative production to replace the shortfall. The supply source that could potentially
ramp up quickly is tight oil. In the New Policies Scenario global tight oil production is
6.7 mb/d in 2025, but if prices were higher, the volumes of tight oil produced in the United
States would increase (Figure 3.9). However, despite the more flexible nature of tight oil
production, this additional supply would take some time to materialise. For example, if
prices in 2025 were suddenly to increase from $100/bbl (as in the New Policies Scenario)
to $120/bbl, over the following three years around 600 kb/d of additional production might
be expected to come online in the United States as a result. However, one year after the
sudden price rise, the increase in production would be around 350 kb/d, only 60% of the
total increase that would be ultimately realised. This is because, by 2025, the majority of
the most economic sites across the different plays will already have been drilled and/or
because the best remaining sites would be drilled even without the sudden increase in
prices. Despite the higher number of rigs in operation and the greater number of wells that
can be drilled economically, the additional wells drilled immediately after a price increase
yield a relatively low level of incremental production. Tight oil could, therefore, play a role
in ameliorating any sudden price rise, but it should not be relied upon to be able to satisfy
within a year’s time any major supply shortfalls that might arise.
In summary, the cuts in upstream oil investment have already re-shaped the outlook for oil
markets. Some of the effects are manifest, such as the decline in tight oil production since
its peak in early 2015; but, given the inherent lags in developing most sources of crude
oil, many other impacts are likely to be most pronounced towards the end of the current
decade and into the early 2020s. Our analysis suggests that there is scope to recover from
152

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

one or two years of supressed investments; this is the current situation given the levels of
investment seen in 2015 and so far in 2016. But, if this is prolonged into 2017 or beyond,
it becomes increasingly unlikely that supply and demand can be matched without rapid
price rises. If the level of project approvals in 2017 does not return to the average levels
observed over the past ten years, this is likely to foreshadow the next boom-and-bust cycle
for the industry and lead to a more volatile oil price environment.
Figure 3.17 ⊳ Global conventional crude oil project approvals required to fill
25
20

16 billion barrels
required annually

15

18 billion barrels
required annually

21 billion barrels
required annually

10

1 year of
suppressed
investment

2 years of
suppressed
investment

2017

2018-25

2016

2015

2017-25

2016

2015

2015

2016-25

2010-14

2005-09

2000-04

1995-99

1990-94

1985-89

1975-79

1980-84

5
1970-74

Annual average (billion barrels)

supply-demand gap in 2025

3 years of
suppressed
investment

With three years of suppressed investments, future annual approvals
must exceed 21 billion barrels, greater than any average level seen since the 1970s
Sources: IEA analysis; Rystad Energy for historical levels.

3.4.2 The impact of climate targets on upstream oil assets

© OECD/IEA, 2016

While the previous section considered the possibility and consequences of underinvestment, this section discusses the possibility that lower oil demand could result in
surplus supply and stranded assets. Fossil-fuel producers are used to making long-term
investment decisions, despite the myriad uncertainties that exist in markets. But firm
pursuit of a 2 °C trajectory for GHG emissions represents a relatively new and pervasive
risk, since it will have profound consequences for the role of fossil fuels in the global energy
system.21 Even with widespread deployment of carbon capture and storage, fossil-fuel
consumption will need to fall to meet climate goals. Would these reductions in demand
21. The Paris Agreement aims to keep the global temperature rise “well below 2 °C” and to pursue efforts to limit the
temperature rise to 1.5 °C (see Chapter 8.) This section focuses on the 450 Scenario, which has a 50% probability of a
2 °C temperature rise, recognising that mitigation in line with a more ambitious temperature objective would increase
the risk of stranded upstream oil and gas assets.

Chapter 3 | Oil market outlook

153

3

put the upstream oil and gas industry at risk of severe losses, with upstream assets left
stranded by falling demand? Or can the transition to a low-carbon economy be managed
smoothly, with losses kept to a minimum? There are multiple strands to this issue, which
are inter-related and often conflated. This section focuses on three questions:


What happens to oil demand and existing oil production in the 450 Scenario?



Do we need additional upstream investment in the 450 Scenario; if so, how much and
what is the risk of leaving upstream assets stranded in this scenario?



What would be the implications for the upstream if climate policies suddenly strengthen
beyond the Nationally Determined Contributions made as part of the Paris Agreement,
or the industry invests in anticipation of demand that does not materialise?

Capital investment into assets that is not recouped is said to be “stranded” and our analysis
concentrates mainly on the upstream oil sector. In the 450 Scenario, coal is hit much harder
than oil, in terms of lower demand, but coal extraction is much less capital-intensive than
oil production and the value of extractive coal assets – and therefore of any potential
stranded assets – is relatively small (although the implications for employment, in a
labour-intensive sector, would be significant). As discussed in the World Energy Investment
Outlook (IEA, 2014), the risk of stranded assets in the coal sector is concentrated further
down the value chain, in coal-fired power stations. Conversely, in the case of natural gas,
demand is higher than today in 2040 in the 450 Scenario. While there are potential risks
for midstream gas infrastructure (including pipelines and LNG terminals), the issue of
upstream stranded assets appears less pressing for gas than for oil in a 2 °C world.

Oil demand and existing production

© OECD/IEA, 2016

In the 450 Scenario, global oil demand peaks by 2020 and then starts a steady decline,
reaching 73.2 mb/d in 2040. By 2030, oil consumption is falling by an average of over
1 mb/d each year and is already 10% lower than the starting point in 2015. The maximum
annual decline seen in any year is 1.5%. This is significant, but it is still well short of the
amount by which production declines from oil fields each year (Figure 3.18). As discussed
above, the observed decline rate for conventional fields that have passed their peak is
around 6% per year, and if all investment were to cease entirely, this decline rate would
accelerate to the natural decline rate, which is closer to 9% per year.
The way that production declines from existing oil and gas fields provides a critically
important backdrop to the stranded assets debate. In order to keep oil production at the
levels required in the 450 Scenario, these declines still have to be offset by developing new
reserves in known fields and by discovering and developing new resources. In the New
Policies Scenario, around 85% of oil and gas upstream investment to 2040 is required simply
to compensate for declines at existing fields, rather than to meet increases in demand. In
the 450 Scenario, offsetting decline becomes the sole driver for investment.

154

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

Figure 3.18 ⊳ Global oil demand and observed decline in current supply
mb/d

sources in the 450 Scenario

100

Oil demand
Production from
current sources

80
60
40
20

2015

2030

2040

The observed decline from today’s producing fields is much greater
than the anticipated decline in oil demand in the 450 Scenario

Upstream oil investment in the 450 Scenario
A significant tranche of oil production over the period to 2040 comes from the reserves in
today’s producing fields. These are the proven, developed reserves in existing fields that
will be tapped by infrastructure that is already in place. These reserves are produced in all
scenarios, without substantial additional capital expenditure. However, the contribution
from these existing fields tails off over time and new fields need to be brought onstream.
The volume of proven undeveloped reserves and new resources that will be exploited
depends on the overall levels of demand, so it varies by scenario. In the New Policies
Scenario, around 580 billion barrels of new resources and reserves need to be developed,
compared with some 390 billion barrels in the 450 Scenario. Developing these reserves
and resources requires capital expenditure: $11 trillion to develop the 580 billion barrels
required in the New Policies Scenario and $6.8 trillion for the 390 billion barrels in the
450 Scenario.22

© OECD/IEA, 2016

This 190 billion barrel differential between the two scenario projections provides some
boundaries for the discussion about stranded assets, as it is investment in new fields that
runs the most risk of becoming surplus to requirements. There are two aspects. First, some
of these 190 billion barrels have already had money spent on their discovery and appraisal.
22. Note that these figures do not reflect the number of barrels actually produced in each scenario to 2040 (910 billion
barrels are produced in the period 2016-2040 in the New Policies Scenario, 785 billion barrels in the 450 Scenario). Some
of today’s fields will continue to produce, in declining volumes, without significant investment, while additional capital
investment made to 2040 continues to result in production post-2040. As a result, there is no direct equivalence between
cumulative investment numbers and cumulative production numbers in our scenarios.

Chapter 3 | Oil market outlook

155

3

This investment is not recovered before 2040 in the 450 Scenario. Second, there is the
possibility that companies decide to go ahead with new investment into projects involving
these resources, but end up with production potential which is ultimately not needed – if,
for example, companies plan for only a moderately carbon-constrained future, but end up
in one aligned with the 2 °C goal. We consider each of these categories of investment in
turn.
Of the 190 billion barrel differential between the two scenario projections, around
90 billion barrels consists of proven, but undeveloped, reserves. The capital already
spent proving up these 90 billion barrels, i.e. the exploration costs, is not recouped in the
450 Scenario before 2040. Some of it might be recovered after 2040 but, for the purposes
of this analysis, we shall assume that all of these exploration investments are stranded. It is
not simple to assign them a value, particularly since the costs were, in some cases, incurred
many years ago; but we estimate the expenditure incurred to be around $200 billion. The
loss of revenue from failing to produce these reserves is a supplementary consideration,
as discussed in Box 3.3.
Beyond these exploration costs, there is no reason why other upstream assets should
become stranded in the transition, provided the process is one in which a consistent and
credible course towards decarbonisation is pursued. If the path towards the 450 Scenario is
clear and visible to investors, there would be little reason to develop new resources in the
expectation of a much higher trajectory for demand and prices. The $6.8 trillion of upstream
investment in the 450 Scenario brings about new projects that are just sufficient to balance
supply and demand at prices that ensure that new projects generate an adequate return:
markets are in equilibrium and adjust to the low-carbon transition. Although the valuation
of the companies involved in the sector would be lower, in a well-ordered transition new
upstream investments do not become stranded.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

A smooth transition is obviously desirable, but this is not necessarily how markets
function in practice or how policies evolve. Investments have to anticipate market and
policy developments and can run behind, or ahead of, eventual demand. They could be
made and not fully recuperated. This is most likely to occur if oil and gas companies and
investors misread or misjudge future levels of energy and climate policy ambition, or there
is a rapid, unanticipated switch in policy direction or intensity. Industry may re-invest
current cash flows into developing new resources in anticipation of a steady increase in
demand, but then find that these investments are operating in the much more constrained
circumstances of the 450 Scenario. Given the long-term nature of upstream assets and
the cyclical nature of the investment, policy-makers need to be aware of the disconnect
between investments needs under the New Policies Scenario and the 450 Scenario when
designing future decarbonisation targets.

156

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

Box 3.3 ⊳ Putting a value on the shift in oil demand trajectory

Lower demand for oil in the 450 Scenario compared with the New Policies Scenario
would be felt by upstream companies, as a reduction in revenue from both lower
production and lower prices.23 In countries where upstream activity is mainly
conducted by private companies, the reduction in future income – to the extent that
it is recognised by markets – would have implications for the company valuations.
Moreover, if listed companies carry reserves on their books that they cannot produce
in the 450 Scenario, this could also affect their valuations (although, as we have seen,
large volumes of these reserves are produced, even in the 450 Scenario).
To give an indication of the potential size of these effects, we can compare the sum
of the discounted future net income (total revenue net of costs and taxes) of private
oil and gas companies in the New Policies Scenario and the 450 Scenario, using
a field-by-field database that classifies asset ownership by type of company, and
making assumptions about the ownership of future discoveries. This provides a rough
indication of the difference in valuations between the two scenarios, based on the
premise that the market value of listed oil and gas upstream companies should be
roughly equivalent to the net present value of their future net income.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

If one assumes that today’s market capitalisation of listed oil and gas companies
is based on an outlook similar to the New Policies Scenario, then the 450 Scenario
results in an average fall in value of around 20% (although there will be variations
depending, for example, on a company’s relative focus on oil or gas and the costs of
its project portfolio).24 There are two factors that keep this difference in check and
one major uncertainty affecting the calculation. The underlying declines in production
from existing oil and gas fields means that most investment, in both scenarios, goes to
offset decline, so the differences in demand between the two scenarios have a smaller
effect on the overall picture than might be expected. And, even though there is a
difference of some $50/bbl in the oil price between the New Policies Scenario and the
450 Scenario, discount rates mean that even large variations in net income late in the
projection period have only a slight impact on the calculation of net present value. Not
surprisingly, the major element of uncertainty is the movement of oil prices along the
way. As we have seen in recent years, oil price swings can quickly produce short-term
changes in valuation, greater than the long-term variability that our analysis attributes
to climate policy. Such market volatility could be exacerbated by cycles of stronger
and weaker policy action in relation to climate change, a possibility examined in the
Disjointed Transition Case below.

23. This does not automatically imply lower net cash flow, as companies also incur lower investments and lower costs. As
shown in the Spotlight above, costs in the oil industry are correlated to oil prices, with a feedback loop in which changes
in costs affect prices, but price movements also have an impact on costs.
24. A 10% rate is used to discount future cash flows. The changes in valuation do not vary significantly if this is changed:
the difference between scenarios is 23%, using a 5% discount rate, and 15%, using a 15% rate.

Chapter 3 | Oil market outlook

157

3

Forcing the issue: Disjointed Transition Case
One can imagine that, particularly in the early years of a shift in demand patterns, the
industry might be overly optimistic in its reading of the future. Because timescales for
investment decisions for oil production tend to be long (3-5 years or more), this may lead
to investment in assets that become stranded due to lower demand. The actual volume
of investment that might become stranded would depend on the character of individual
investments. Larger-scale, higher cost projects would be most at risk. It would also depend
on the way that over-supply affects markets: on one hand, over-investment can be
compensated by reducing the investment needed later; on the other hand, it could also
result in a period of lower prices that brings down project returns.
To quantify this question, we have created an illustrative “Disjointed Transition Case”, in
which demand follows the New Policies Scenario for a period (until 2030) and then drops
abruptly to the level of the 450 Scenario over a relatively short period (in this case, over
the five-year period to 2035). As a result, prior to 2030, operators invest on the assumption
that prices and demand will continue to rise as in the New Policies Scenario, only to be
faced with a sharp break in the trend (Figure 3.19). This is intentionally a profoundly
disruptive case for oil markets. Less severe transitions – as the 450 Scenario itself shows
– do not generate significant stranding. The Disjointed Transition Case could be taken to
represent a trajectory in which national and international efforts are initially insufficient
to deal adequately with the climate challenge but, by the mid-2020s, the perception of
climate disruption is such that, whether through additional collective or individual efforts,
it triggers a precipitous transition towards the 2 °C target.25 It could also represent a case
in which the impact of announced climate policies was not fully taken on board by industry
until the moment when demand started to fall.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

In terms of demand, this represents a massive shock – a decline of some 20 mb/d over a
five-year period, which would lead in turn to a large overhang in supply (and a sharp drop in
price). A significant part of this reduction in oil demand is absorbed by declining output from
existing fields which, as investment in new fields dries up, serves to bring overall production
down. Still, two types of stranded assets arise. Some projects developed between 2015 and
2030, with price expectations oriented to the New Policies Scenario outlook, fail to recover
their invested capital. In addition, part of the demand shock is absorbed by shutting in
fields that have already been developed. There is some overlap between these groups,
since fields that are shut in would be those with higher operating costs and thus those less
likely to recover the capital costs. In total, we estimate that balancing supply with reduced
demand over this five-year period would strand an additional 30 billion barrels of oil and
around $380 billion of additional above-ground investment. There are a number of moving
parts to this calculation that might reduce the true amount at risk: government tax takes
25. It is important to recognise that such an emissions pathway would not be entirely consistent with a 50% probability
of a 2 °C temperature rise (the objective of the 450 Scenario). This is because total GHG emissions to 2030 are higher
than levels in the 450 Scenario. To have the same chance of avoiding dangerous climate change, efforts to reduce
emissions after 2030 would need to be even stronger. The shock to demand and prices is, therefore, likely to be larger
than modelled here.
158

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

could be reduced, for example, to ensure that the projects remain commercial (but with
reduced income for governments and added burdens for taxpayers). On the other hand,
the period of lower prices that would accompany a large supply overhang, and the fall in
oil and gas revenues, could be deeply destabilising for companies and countries reliant on
hydrocarbon income.
Moving this transition between scenarios forward so that the switch from the New Policies
Scenario to the 450 Scenario takes place five years earlier (i.e. between 2025 and 2030),
would lessen the impact. The demand shock remains severe – a decline of some 14 mb/d in
a five-year period – but, in this case, we estimate that 22 billion barrels of oil would become
stranded and just over $310 billion of above-ground investment would be stranded. The
overall message is clear: the later the transition to a 2 °C trajectory is deferred, the more
difficult and disruptive it promises to be for the upstream oil industry.

mb/d

Figure 3.19 ⊳ Global oil demand in a Disjointed Transition Case
120

New Policies
Scenario
450 Scenario
Disjointed
Transition Case

100

80

60
2010

2015

2020

2025

2030

2035

2040

Stranded upstream oil investments in the 450 Scenario are limited,
but a disjointed transition would increase the risks sharply

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Conclusion
Fossil-fuel producers (countries and companies) face a world full of uncertainties: economics,
geopolitics, geology, technology, financing and policy. Some of these uncertainties present
risks for fossil fuels, others opportunities. Making investments, despite these uncertainties,
is familiar territory for the fossil-fuel industry, and resource-owners and licensees have
always needed to develop risk strategies. Countries with fossil-fuel resources naturally look
to maximise the national gains from their development, but also develop other sectors
of their economy and build up financial reserves. Companies typically keep a portfolio of
projects, with varying levels of exposure to risk.
Chapter 3 | Oil market outlook

159

3

Climate change is a profound challenge to a fossil-fuel dominated energy system, but
one that is now well recognised. All fossil-fuel producers face the prospect that demand
for fossil fuels will be affected, even with large-scale deployment of carbon capture and
storage, as action to tackle climate change intensifies and policies encourage innovation
and cost reductions in new technologies, rendering some fossil-fuel options less attractive
or obsolete. Companies engaged solely in these businesses face the risk of losing out,
particularly those engaged in capital-intensive projects that involve long cost recovery
times. At a minimum, the industry needs to stress-test its strategies against the risks arising
from climate change.
Yet a key message of this analysis is that significant investment in developing new oil
and gas resources is needed, even in the 450 Scenario. Natural gas is least affected in
this scenario, meaning that opportunities remain for countries rich in this resource (and
companies focussing in full or in part on gas). But even if oil demand falls, as projected in
the 450 Scenario, large new oil fields will still be required to meet global demand, because
the decline in output from existing fields is much greater than the anticipated decline in
demand.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

If government policies can provide a clear and consistent route to decarbonisation – as in
the 450 Scenario – there is little reason to assume upstream oil and gas assets will become
stranded. Investment in oil and gas remains an essential component of a least-cost transition
to a low-carbon future (albeit at a reduced pace compared with the levels required in the
New Policies Scenario). But there is little room for the industry to be complacent about the
future. Though government policies can smooth the transition, stop-and-go cycles of policy
volatility can have the opposite effect. If the low-carbon transition is delayed or disjointed,
or if the impact of announced policies is under-estimated, there is a risk that major losses
will be incurred. Climate change represents a fundamental challenge to all those engaged
in tackling the issue or its implications.

160

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

Chapter 4
Natural gas market outlook
Every silver lining has a cloud
Highlights

• Global natural gas demand grows by nearly half over the Outlook period in the New
Policies Scenario. The annual growth rate of 1.5% is lower than the 2.3% observed
over the past 25 years, but gas is nonetheless the fastest growing among the fossil
fuels and increases its share in global primary energy demand from 21% today to
24% in 2040. In contrast, in the 450 Scenario, gas use plateaus from the 2030s, but as
a relatively clean and flexible fuel, gas still sees its share increasing slightly.

• The power sector accounts for 34% of the growth in global gas use, but gas faces
stiff competition in some import-dependent markets (especially Asia) where it
cannot, typically, beat coal on a commercial basis and vies with renewables for policy
support. Even though assumed prices for imported gas are lower than in WEO-2015,
in key Asian power systems new gas plants would be a lower cost option than new
coal plants for baseload generation by 2025 (when gas prices reach $11/MBtu and
coal prices approach $75/tonne), only if coal prices were $150/tonne.

• The United States and Australia contribute two-thirds to gas production growth until
2020, but from the early 2020s onwards the global gas balance increasingly relies on
output growth from a much broader range of producers, with East Africa emerging
as a new gas province and Argentina revived as an important gas producer, this time
from shale. The Middle East, China and Russia respectively account for 24%, 13% and
8% of the incremental global gas production over the Outlook period.

• Inter-regional gas trade grows by some 70%, with 45% of the additional trade set
to materialise over the coming ten years. The period to the mid-2020s sees a gas
market in flux: LNG overcapacity is gradually absorbed; new players enter the stage;
established market mechanisms and incumbents are challenged and gas prices
rebound as the market rebalances. The concentration of import growth in Asia
underpins a shift in trade flows towards the Asia-Pacific basin.

• Although, over the Outlook period, new pipeline connections are built and existing
ones reinforced, complex pipeline projects generally find it harder to garner political
and financial support in a market awash with LNG. Floating storage and regasification
units help to unlock new and smaller markets for LNG. LNG captures around 70% of
the additional gas trade and thus manages to increase its share in inter-regional gas
trade from 42% in 2014 to 53% in 2040.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

• Gas prices are increasingly determined by gas supply and demand fundamentals;
new trading hubs and the gradual removal of trade restrictions, such as destination
clauses, limiting the buyer’s right to resell the gas, also ease the emergence of a
globalised gas market. With the LNG overcapacity gone by the mid-2020s, timely
investment in new gas supply projects is needed to pre-empt price volatility.
Chapter 4 | Natural gas market outlook

161

4.1 Recent market and policy developments
Growth in global consumption of natural gas has slowed markedly in recent years, from
almost 3% per year in the first decade of this century, to around 1.4% per year on average
since 2010. This slowdown has put some producers in a tight corner, as billions of dollars
of investment had been poured into new gas fields, liquefaction facilities and shipping
capacities in anticipation of stronger growth. Although there are some cyclical elements
to the downturn and many regional variations, it has also raised some more fundamental
questions about the longer term outlook for gas: while gas is set to perform much better
than other fossil fuels over the coming decades, some of the pillars on which a bright
future for gas have been constructed look a little less solid than they have in the past.
The power sector is a case in point. With gas use in industry continuing to grow robustly,
the reasons for the slowdown in global gas demand growth can primarily be found in power
systems around the world. In the European Union (EU), subdued economic growth and a
rapid build-up of renewables generating capacity have created slack in the EU Emissions
Trading System, reducing the carbon-dioxide (CO2) price and so helping to tilt the economic
calculation away from gas and towards coal; gas use in the EU power sector has fallen
by nearly 12% per year, on average, between 2010 and 2014, a notable reversal. Even
in countries experiencing strong electricity demand growth, as in much of Asia, gas has
faced a struggle to gain ground against coal and renewables. In China, the double-digit
growth rates in gas demand have faded: liquefied natural gas (LNG) imports to China hardly
increased in 2015.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

A combination of robust LNG supply, slowing demand growth, low oil prices and ample
availability of shale gas in North America has pulled down regional gas prices around the
world. In 2015, average import prices for gas stood at $7 per million British thermal units
(MBtu) in Europe and $10.3/MBtu in Japan, both some 40% down from their respective
peaks in 2012. Yet, for the moment, there are few signs that the drop in prices in Europe
and Asia is triggering much additional demand, either because gas remains uncompetitive
against other fuels or because gaps in markets and infrastructure prevent consumers from
taking advantage. The situation though is quite different in North America, where prices
well below $3/MBtu have prompted a new round of switching from coal to gas in the
power sector, with as much power generated in the United States from gas in 2015 as from
coal, for the first time.
On the production side, upstream capital spending declined markedly in 2015 and 2016,
but a wave of previously sanctioned supply projects – notably LNG export projects in
Australia and the United States – continues to collide into an already well-supplied market.
This ramp-up of supply capacity amidst a general slowdown in demand growth is keeping
the global market awash with gas. In turn, this is providing strong impetus to changes in the
way that gas is priced and marketed, chipping away at the rigidities that have characterised
LNG and pipeline supply arrangements in the past. Whether a combination of today’s
162

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

investment cuts and the advent of a more flexible and liquid market bodes well for the
delivery of new long-term capital-intensive gas supply investments is a key uncertainty for
our Outlook.
Another set of questions comes from the Paris Agreement on climate change. In advance of
the 21st Conference of the Parties (COP21), more than 180 countries submitted pledges on
how they intend to reduce their greenhouse-gas (GHG) emissions. The degree of ambition
varies widely between countries and the role that gas will play in achieving the long-term
target of the agreement is not evident. On the one hand, gas is too carbon intensive to take
a long-term lead in the decarbonisation of the energy sector. Uncertainty over the extent
of leakage of methane, a potent GHG, along the gas supply chain also cast a shadow over
the fuel’s environmental credentials. On the other hand, natural gas is the least carbon
intensive of the fossil fuels and thus burning gas is a much more efficient way to use a
limited carbon budget than combusting coal or oil. Gas is especially advantageous to the
transition if it can help smooth the integration of renewables into power systems along the
way.
Ultimately, the case for gas as a relatively clean and flexible source of energy remains very
strong, especially for countries that have large resources within relatively easy reach. But,
for countries relying on gas transported over longer distances, the commercial case for
gas looks weaker: even at today’s low prices, imported gas typically cannot beat coal on
a cost basis, while vying with renewables that enjoy stronger policy support. Gas – LNG
in particular – is amply available for the moment, but it will take time for new markets to
develop and consumers to absorb the supply overhang, by which time the availability and
price of imported gas might already be changing as markets tighten. Gas resources are
large and widely distributed, but a dearth of new investment decisions in today’s market
– and the long-lead times of new supply projects – could mean a return to more volatile
conditions in the future. As it seeks to promote new LNG projects, the industry will need
to achieve significant cost reductions compared with the current wave of LNG investments.
The emergence of Australia and the United States as key LNG exporters is reshuffling the
international gas order, but it remains to be seen how the main incumbents, such as Russia
and Qatar, will react to the more competitive international environment. As the analysis
in this chapter shows, the potential for gas is large, but the pitfalls and uncertainties are
many.

4.2 Trends to 2040 by scenario

© OECD/IEA, 2016

4.2.1 Medium-term dynamics
The outlook for gas in the medium term (i.e. the period to the end of the current decade) is
characterised by relatively low prices and subdued investment activity (IEA, 2016a). This is
critically important to the long-term outlook. The markets for oil, coal and gas are currently
all over supplied and the time it takes for the markets to swing back into equilibrium varies
by fuel. We expect the global oil market to rebalance first, a process that has started, and
Chapter 4 | Natural gas market outlook

163

4

the coal market to rebalance last. When the balance is achieved in the gas market is a
question that depends on many moving parts. On the demand side, global gas consumption
does not pick up quickly in our projections in response to lower prices: in the New Policies
Scenario, it is projected to grow by an average of 1.4% per year for the rest of the decade,
reaching 3 800 billion cubic metres (bcm) in 2020. Compared with oil, which grows at 0.9%
per year, and coal, which declines at 0.1% per year over the same period, gas does well.
But the average rate of growth does not exceed that seen in the past five years, as a more
downbeat outlook on global economic growth restrains primary energy demand growth.
Markets therefore struggle to absorb the additional 130 bcm of liquefaction capacity
currently under construction (85% of which is in Australia and the United States), which
gradually comes online in the period to 2020 (Figure 4.1). Demand in Japan declines over the
medium term while that in Korea stagnates – the two countries account for more than 60%
of inter-regional LNG trade today. Additional LNG imports into Europe are limited by sluggish
demand growth (due to subdued economic growth and efficiency improvements), low CO2
and coal prices and competitive Russian supplies. Although Latin America and the Middle
East offer pockets of growth, neither of these two regions is a natural home for large-scale
LNG imports. Asia – with China at the forefront – holds the key to a well-balanced gas market:
the region’s potential for growth in LNG imports is huge, but unlocking it requires progress on
market and environmental regulation and time for infrastructure development.

bcm

Figure 4.1 ⊳ Liquefaction capacity by key region
600

Other
Russia
Australia
United States
Africa
Middle East

500
400
300
200
100

2016

Under construction

2020

Some 130 bcm of additional LNG capacity is under construction,
85% of which is in the United States and Australia

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Sources: IEA analysis; Cedigaz (2016).

On the supply side, growth in production is concentrated in Australia and the United States,
as investment elsewhere is subdued. But these two countries cannot be relied upon to
sustain output growth over the period to 2040: the flow of new projects in Australia is
164

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

drying up and the United States is unlikely, in our view, to maintain the precipitous growth
in shale gas output that has been seen in recent years. With its major new upstream
developments in the Yamal Peninsula underutilised, Russia has the largest available spare
production and transport infrastructure capacity. The challenge for other producers is to
pick up the baton, at a time of substantial changes in the contractual terms and pricing
conditions on which new projects have traditionally relied: the anticipated shift over the
medium term is unmistakeably in the direction of more LNG with shorter contract duration,
full destination flexibility and weakened linkages to oil price movements.

4.2.2 Long-term scenarios
The New Policies Scenario, the central scenario in this World Energy Outlook, incorporates
all policies and measures that are already in place today, while taking into account, in
full or in part, the aims, targets and intentions that have been announced, even if the
means by which they will be realised are not yet fully in force. Announced policies geared,
for instance, towards improving energy efficiency, fighting air pollution, decarbonising the
energy system or reducing methane emissions can be expected to have a marked impact on
future gas market trends (Box 4.1). This scenario also reflects the climate pledges proposed
at COP21.
Box 4.1 ⊳ Fugitive methane emissions: a rising concern

© OECD/IEA, 2016

In 2016, the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) published its annual
greenhouse-gas inventory report, which contained a major revision of its estimates for
the contribution of the oil and gas industry to methane emissions: the EPA increased its
estimate of US oil and gas industry-related methane emissions by about 30% relative to
the inventory from 2015.1 The EPA states that the main reason for the upward revision
in fugitive methane emissions is related to higher (and previously under-estimated)
equipment counts, i.e. the number of wells, valves, pneumatic controls, compressors,
pipelines, tanks and other potential sources of leaks. Several other stakeholders have
maintained for some time that these EPA estimates are too low, while the industry
points out that significant, voluntary progress in reducing emissions has been made
over the last several years. Given the strong consequences that methane emissions
have for near-term global warming, as well as their other harmful impacts (such as
reduced agricultural crop yields), it is not surprising that this issue is rising up the
energy agenda. Notable recent policy announcements include a commitment by
the United States, Canada and Mexico to reduce their oil and gas-related methane
emissions by 40-45% by 2025. Analysis of the level of methane emissions and the
scope and costs to reduce them will be contained in a planned special report in the
WEO series in 2017.

1. The 30% increase relates to the reporting year 2013, which is the most recent year reported in both the
2015 and 2016 US EPA greenhouse-gas inventories.

Chapter 4 | Natural gas market outlook

165

4

Similar to the growth rate projected over the medium term, global gas demand grows on
average at 1.5% per year in the New Policies Scenario to 2040. This slowdown, compared
with the annual growth of 2.3% observed over the past 25 years, reflects two important
trends. First, there is the overall context of slower growth in primary energy demand, which
is projected to rise at only half the rate seen between 1990 and 2014. Second, there is the
impact of saturation in some mature markets, allied to a more competitive environment for
gas. Yet gas does manage a steady expansion of its role in global energy, underpinned by
demand in power and in industrial gas use. Growth in gas production will entail development
of more complex projects, putting upward pressure on prices in all major regions (see
Chapter 1). Gas prices in the United States, the European Union and Japan rebound in
the first-half of the projection period, respectively reaching $4.7/MBtu, $9.2/MBtu and
$11.3/MBtu in 2025. In the long term, prices gradually climb to around $7/MBtu in the United
States, $11.5/MBtu in the European Union and $12.4/MBtu in Japan. These price trajectories
facilitate investment of $9.4 trillion in gas supply over the Outlook period.

Thousand bcm

Figure 4.2 ⊳ World natural gas demand by scenario
6
5

Current Policies Scenario
New Policies Scenario

4

450 Scenario

3
2
1

1990

2000

2010

2020

2030

2040

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Global gas demand is projected to plateau from the late-2020s in the 450 Scenario

The Current Policies Scenario provides a trajectory for natural gas in an energy world
shaped only by policies that were already firmly embedded in legislation as of mid-2016.
Gas demand grows more quickly in this scenario – by 1.9% per year on average – but it
makes less ground versus coal than in the New Policies Scenario, as coal faces substantially
fewer policy headwinds. The share of gas in primary energy supply reaches 24% in 2040 (up
from 21% in 2014) – well below oil and coal which stand at 28% and 27%, respectively, at the
end of the Outlook period. Gas fares slightly better in the global power mix (24% in 2040,
compared with 23% in the New Policies Scenario), the net result of two opposing trends.
On the one hand, without the impetus of some of the policy changes in the New Policies
Scenario, especially those spurred by COP21, coal often prevails in competition between
166

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

coal and gas in the power sector. On the other hand, growth in renewables is lower, leaving
more room for gas to satisfy higher power demand. In the Current Policies Scenario, in 2040,
gas prices reach nearly $8/MBtu, $13/MBtu and $14.4/MBtu, respectively, in the United
States, the European Union and Japan. Investment in gas supply amounts to $10.9 trillion,
of which $7.5 trillion are dedicated to tapping into conventional and unconventional gas
resources around the world, while $3.4 trillion are mobilised to expand pipeline and LNG
infrastructure.
The 450 Scenario sets out an energy pathway consistent with a 50% chance of limiting the
global increase in temperature to 2 °C. This scenario paints a strikingly different picture
of future gas markets: gas demand keeps growing through the mid-2020s, but then starts
levelling off, resulting in an overall growth rate of 0.5% per year over the projection period
(Figure 4.2). Although gas fares markedly better than other fossil fuels – oil and coal decline
by 1% and 2.6% per year respectively – this scenario brings out forcibly that even gas is
too carbon intensive for long-term growth in a decarbonising energy system. Gas may be
a supporting fuel for the transition to a low-carbon energy system but this should not be
misunderstood as a sustainable growth opportunity in a 2 °C world. Gas still plays a critical
role in power generation: in the first-half of the projection period, existing gas plants
achieve significant CO2 savings as they displace coal-fired generation. As the deployment
of variable renewable energy sources grows over the Outlook period, flexible operation of
gas-fired plants provides system services and aids the integration of these technologies.
But the volumes actually consumed decline in the latter half of the projection period, as
the sector approaches full decarbonisation. Gas demand plateaus in the buildings sector in
the 2030s, while it continues to grow in industry and in transport (where gas use is higher
than in the New Policies Scenario).

© OECD/IEA, 2016

The role of gas in the 450 Scenario varies strongly by region (Figure 4.3). Through the late
2020s, growth in global gas demand is spurred by additional gas use in China, the Middle
East and India, while consumption remains flat in the United States and the European
Union in that time period. Gas burn in the power sector peaks in the United States and
the European Union around 2025. The decline accelerates in the 2030s, as the fuel is too
carbon intensive to deliver further decarbonisation gains in these systems and efficiency
improvements reduce the demand for gas. With carbon capture and storage (CCS) picking
up in the 2030s, China has another low-carbon option available that constrains the extent to
which gas can gain market share in the power sector at the expense of coal. The momentum
for gas demand growth therefore shifts to the transport sector, which accounts for a fifth of
incremental Chinese gas demand between 2030 and 2040. CCS makes only limited inroads
into the Indian power sector, thus leaving room for gas to decrease the carbon intensity
of power generation by displacing unabated coal. In India the power sector, therefore,
remains the primary driver of gas demand growth, even after 2030.
The 450 Scenario sees the lowest gas prices of all three scenarios in the long term. By 2040,
US gas prices reach $5.4/MBtu while prices in the European Union and in Japan stand
at nearly $10/MBtu and just under $11/MBtu respectively. Despite subdued production
Chapter 4 | Natural gas market outlook

167

4

growth, the 450 Scenario still requires considerable investment in gas supply – amounting
to $7 trillion over the Outlook period – not least to compensate for natural decline in the
many fields that near depletion in the coming 25 years. More than a third of the investment
is needed for transmission and export infrastructure. Some of the fields that have seen
money spent on their discovery will not be needed in the 450 Scenario but, beyond the loss
of these explorations costs, there are no inevitable reasons for further stranded assets to
accumulate in this scenario (see Chapter 3).
Figure 4.3 ⊳ Change in gas demand in selected regions in the 450 Scenario
2014-30
2030-40

United States
European Union
Russia
Japan and Korea
Latin America
Africa
Middle East
India
China
-200

-100

0

100

200

300

400

500
bcm

Fuel switching plays a key role in the period to 2030 but efficiency gains and
power sector decarbonisation reduce gas demand growth in the long term

4.3 A closer look at the New Policies Scenario

© OECD/IEA, 2016

4.3.1 Demand
The New Policies Scenario sees global gas demand increase by nearly half from 3 500 bcm
in 2014 to over 5 200 bcm in 2040 (Table 4.1). With an annual average growth rate of
1.5% over the Outlook period, growth in gas consumption is markedly stronger than in
oil and coal, which grow at 0.5% and 0.2% respectively. In a post COP21 world, natural
gas offers a lower carbon alternative to coal and oil and a way to tackle the ubiquitous
air quality problems that harm the health of millions of people, especially in developing
countries (IEA, 2016b). The outlook for gas is, however, clouded by uncertainties around
the economics of gas vis-à-vis its competitors and the readiness of policy-makers to
support growth in gas demand. In virtually all major gas-importing regions, gas is costlier
than coal in energy terms. Without measures to tilt the calculation in favour of gas, the fuel
is confined to markets where consumers have a convenience yield from gas use (e.g. in the
buildings sector or in certain industries) or to mid- and peak-load power generation where
the fuel cost disadvantage is offset by the lower capital costs of the stations providing
such power. Fuel switching from coal – or in the Middle East from oil – to gas can quickly
168

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

deliver significant reductions of CO2 emissions from the existing power plant fleets, but
in most markets this would not be delivered at scale unless there is a supportive policy
framework, either in the form of carbon pricing or pollutant regulation, or – as in parts of
China – restrictions on the construction of new coal-burning facilities or the forced closure
of existing coal plants (for example, due to air quality concerns).
Table 4.1 ⊳ Natural gas demand by region in New Policies Scenario (bcm)

4

2014-2040

2000

2014

2020

2025

2030

2035

2040

1 418

1 624

1 697

1 732

1 764

1 807

1 835

211

0.5%

806

941

994

1 015

1 038

1 074

1 113

173

0.7%

669

756

796

807

812

824

840

83

0.4%

Europe

482

462

497

515

521

523

512

50

0.4%

Asia Oceania

130

221

206

201

206

210

210

- 11

-0.2%

OECD
Americas
United States

Japan

Change CAAGR*

82

129

103

94

95

97

96

- 34

-1.1%

1 099

1 878

2 097

2 357

2 675

3 013

3 335

1 456

2.2%

594

657

655

665

678

704

725

68

0.4%

82

116

129

141

149

163

176

60

1.6%

388

452

436

432

434

441

447

-5

-0.0%

183

484

626

775

930

1 083

1 223

739

3.6%

China

28

188

297

386

475

547

605

416

4.6%

India

28

50

66

95

128

159

189

138

5.2%

Non-OECD
E. Europe/Eurasia
Caspian
Russia
Asia

Southeast Asia
Middle East
Africa

88

167

176

192

211

237

267

99

1.8%

174

441

509

570

660

741

804

363

2.3%

56

131

143

171

208

255

312

181

3.4%

South Africa

1

4

4

5

7

8

11

7

4.1%

Latin America

91

165

164

177

198

231

270

105

1.9%

9

42

35

36

42

55

66

25

1.8%

Brazil
Bunkers**
World
European Union

0

0

8

17

27

37

49

49

n.a.

2 517

3 502

3 802

4 106

4 466

4 858

5 219

1 717

1.5%

486

418

458

473

473

469

452

34

0.3%

© OECD/IEA, 2016

* Compound average annual growth rate. ** LNG used as an international marine fuel.

The level of ambition laid out in the climate change pledges that countries prepared for
COP21 does not depend critically on a major contribution from gas. Fewer than 30 out of over
160 submissions mention gas as an element of their strategy to meet the pledged emissions
target. Gas-rich countries in the Middle East and North and East Africa constitute the majority
of those making a positive mention of gas in their pledges. In developing Asia – where many
gas exporters have pinned their hopes on a rapid increase in demand – only three countries
(albeit among them China) specify a role for gas in achieving their climate goals.
Chapter 4 | Natural gas market outlook

169

Generally speaking, countries can achieve their proposed GHG emission reductions with
different compositions of energy mix. While gas can certainly play a role, in countries like
South Africa or India, which have large coal reserves, the emerging policy preference appears
to be based on achieving emissions reductions by means of a combination of renewables
and high-efficiency coal, rather than a combination of renewables and gas. In the light of
amply available, relatively cheap coal and rapidly falling costs of renewables technologies,
gas could gain ground in such cases only if it could demonstrate strong credentials as a
secure, affordable and reliable energy source, with price levels and volatility kept within
reasonable limits.
The gas demand trends of the New Policies Scenario reflect these challenges and tradeoffs: gas demand grows in almost all major regions and expands in power generation,
industry, buildings and transport. Yet, the fuel’s share in global power generation stays
flat over the Outlook period and the moderate increase in its share in global primary
energy demand is mainly underpinned by robustly-growing gas consumption in industry.
Demand is approaching saturation in many of the largest resource-rich regions, like the
United States and Russia, although there remains scope for growth in the Middle East and
in gas-rich parts of Africa and Latin America. The challenges for gas are toughest in net gas
importing countries. In the European Union, for example, the share of gas in the region’s
power mix recovers somewhat as coal-fired capacity is retired, but much of the resulting
gap in the mix is taken up by renewables. In coal-rich but gas-importing areas, like India
or parts of Southeast Asia, gas use grows, but it faces an uphill battle to take market share
from coal, while renewables deployment also grows rapidly. The gas industry becomes
increasingly adept at developing niche markets and dealing with the variable seasonal
needs of smaller off-takers, helped by technological advances, such as scalable floating
storage and regasification units (FSRUs) that bypass, in part, the need for large-scale import
infrastructure. But, in the face of strong competition, the gas industry has to work hard for
growth.

Regional trends in demand

© OECD/IEA, 2016

In the New Policies Scenario natural gas demand expands almost everywhere over the
period to 2040, with the fastest growth occurring in developing countries. Gas is an
attractive fuel to meet their rapidly rising energy needs, particularly where a measure
of this demand can be met by developing domestic resources. Nonetheless, a significant
share of the rise in gas use is also met by a rise in imports: inter-regional gas trade grows
slightly faster than the growth in global gas demand, eventually spelling good news for the
export-oriented gas industry and its struggle with excess capacity.
China assumes the role of the engine of global gas demand growth. Over the Outlook period,
China uses an additional 420 bcm of gas – an amount that is equivalent to today’s entire
gas consumption in the European Union – making it the third-largest gas consumer (up
from fifth in 2014) after the United States and the Middle East (Figure 4.4). The Middle East
is not far behind China in terms of gas demand growth in absolute terms: an incremental
170

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

360 bcm of gas are consumed in the various countries of the Middle East in the period to
2040. The Middle East thus becomes the second-largest gas consuming region, from third
today. Gas demand is projected to expand rapidly also in India, Africa and Latin America,
albeit from a low base. Each of these three regions grows – in absolute terms – by more
than the United States, though the United States, despite saturating gas demand, remains
the largest gas consumer over the period. Gas demand ends up higher than today at the
end of the Outlook period in the European Union, but gas demand in 2040 does not exceed
the level reached at the beginning of this decade.
Figure 4.4 ⊳ Gas demand by selected regions in the New Policies Scenario
2014

United States

Additional
in 2040

Middle East
China
European Union
Russia
Africa
Latin America
India
150

300

450

600

750

900
bcm

Developing countries lead the growth in global gas demand

Sectoral trends in demand

© OECD/IEA, 2016

The power sector is the largest gas consuming sector, accounting for 40% of worldwide gas
demand today (Figure 4.5). Power generation contributes 35% to global growth – as much
as industry – but it is the sector of greatest uncertainty because of the number of competing
fuels for power generation, ranging from coal to renewables. Competition from renewables
increases as their costs come down and different technologies (for instance wind onshore)
become competitive in various places over the projection period (see Chapter 11). Despite
the strong growth in gas demand for power and heat plants, the sector’s share in total gas
consumption declines slightly over time, dipping to 38% in 2040.
Gas-fired technologies entail a far lower capital expenditure than coal or nuclear power
plants: for instance in Europe, the overnight cost of a combined-cycle gas turbine (CCGT)
amounts to $1 000 per kilowatt (kW), half the cost of a supercritical coal plant and nearly
seven-times less than a nuclear plant. Depending on the relative fuel prices (and carbon
prices where applicable), the investment cost advantage can offset the typically higher fuel
cost of gas plants. The role of gas in regional power systems in practice varies strongly. In
countries with large domestic gas reserves, such as the United States, Russia and parts
Chapter 4 | Natural gas market outlook

171

4

of the Middle East, power generators benefit from low gas prices and gas-fired plants
run at high utilisation rates, producing baseload electricity (often combined with district
heating as in the case of Russia, or seawater desalination as in the Middle East). In gasimporting countries, like India, South Africa or China, the role of gas-fired plants is currently
largely confined to meeting peak demand and providing balancing power, running at lower
utilisation rates.

Thousand bcm

Figure 4.5 ⊳ World gas demand growth by sector in the New Policies Scenario
6

Other*
Transport
Buildings
Industry**
Power

5
4
3
2
1

2014

2040

Power generation and industry hold the key to global gas demand growth

© OECD/IEA, 2016

* Other includes agriculture and any other non-energy use. ** Industry includes gas used as petrochemical
feedstocks, and energy consumption in coke ovens and blast furnaces.

Fuel switching, primarily between coal and gas, plays an important role in the power
sector. Principally, there are two ways for fuel switching to happen: in the short term,
existing plants compete for utilisation, based on relative fuel cost (and fixed operation and
maintenance cost, if the question is whether or not to keep a given plant operational); and
in the long term, fuel switching can be achieved as a result of investment that changes the
composition of the power plant fleet. Fuel switching between existing plants is particularly
relevant in systems with spare generating capacity and a narrow gap between coal and gas
prices. In the United States, the fuel price evolution projected to 2025 keeps the economics
of coal and gas plants close enough for existing power plants to compete in all three load
segments (Figure 4.6), peak-load (plant utilisation of less than 40%), mid-load (utilisation
between 40% and 70%) and baseload (utilisation larger than 70%). Taking investment costs
into account suggests that CCGTs have a cost advantage over advanced coal-fired plants in
all load segments. Despite an increase in the CO2 price to $30/tonne in 2025, relative fuel
prices in the European Union remain favourable to existing coal plants. However, similar
to the United States, new CCGTs beat new coal plants in most utilisation categories. The
prospects for new gas plants to be built in the European Union, however, are clouded by
question marks around the design of electricity markets and power prices that currently do
172

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

Figure 4.6 ⊳ Levelised cost of electricity generation for existing

Dollars per MWh (2015)

and new coal and gas plant by key region, 2025
(a) United States

250

New:
Coal
Gas

200

Existing:
Coal
Gas

150
100
50

Dollars per MWh (2015)

15%

35%

45%

55%

65%

75%
85%
Plant utilisation

65%

75%
85%
Plant utilisation

(b) Asia

200
150
100
50
15%

Dollars per MWh (2015)

25%

25%

35%

45%

55%

(c) European Union

250
200
150
100
50

15%

25%

35%

45%

55%

65%

75%
85%
Plant utilisation

© OECD/IEA, 2016

The commercial case for coal-to-gas switching in power generation
is not self-evident in key markets outside the United States
Notes: MWh = megawatt-hour. Existing supercritical coal plant efficiency: 39%; existing CCGT efficiency: 58%. New ultrasupercritical coal efficiency: 43%; new CCGT efficiency: 58%. Coal price: $73/tonne in Asia, $70/tonne in the European
Union and $58/tonne in the United States. Gas price: $11.3/MBtu in Asia, $9.2/MBtu in the European Union and
$4.7/MBtu in the United States. A CO2 price of $30/tonne is included in the European Union.

Chapter 4 | Natural gas market outlook

173

4

not reward investment in new plants. The situation is different in Asia, where (in the
absence of a specific policy intervention favouring gas) coal plants have structurally lower
generation cost than gas plants and new gas plant investment is profitable only in mid- and
peak-load operation. Yet, the classic regulated utility model – often with state-ownership –
which is prevalent in Asian power systems adds a political dimension to the economic
calculation that tends to be the driving force behind investment in market-based systems.
Between today and 2040 gas consumption in industry grows by 625 bcm, accounting
for just under 40% of global gas demand growth. The main factor underpinning this gas
demand growth in industry is the rising demand for the process heat and steam generation
needed to meet the requirements of economic growth. Dual-fuel firing is rare in industry,
limiting the scope for fuel switching in the short term. In the long term, gas manages to
displace coal, to a certain degree, in industrial applications with process heat or steam
loads, mainly in China. The potential is highest in cities, or for smaller boilers, where
pollution control devices are typically not cost-effective (IEA, 2016b). In the long term,
heat pumps and solar thermal energy become key competitors for gas for the provision of
low temperature heat in industries such as chemicals, food and paper. For instance, in the
European Union, technological learning gradually brings down the investment cost of heat
pumps and offsets increases in the electricity price over time, keeping the total costs of
heat pumps flat, while rising fuel and CO2 prices push up the cost of gas boilers. The cost
gap between the two technologies closes by the end of the Outlook period (Figure 4.7).
Figure 4.7 ⊳ Annual average running cost of a heat pump and a gas boiler in
Dollars per kW per year (2015)

non energy-intensive industry in the European Union

400

Heat pump
Gas boiler

300

200

100

2014

2020

2030

2040

© OECD/IEA, 2016

In the European Union, the cost gap between a heat pump
and a gas boiler is closing by the end of the Outlook period

Non energy-intensive industries, such as textiles, food and beverages or machinery, account
for nearly half of the industry sector’s gas consumption today. Gas demand in these branches
surges by 360 bcm over the projection period, lifting the share of non energy-intensive
174

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

industries in the industry sector’s gas demand to over half in 2040. Accounting for a third
of industrial gas consumption, the chemical industry is the second-largest user. Despite
gas use in the chemical industry growing by over 200 bcm, the chemical industry’s share in
total industrial gas consumption remains at around a third in 2040. Today, a third of the gas
used in the chemical industry is used as feedstock for the production of chemical products,
mainly ammonia-based fertilisers and methanol, a precursor for several products, including
resins, additives and polymers. The share of feedstock use in the chemical industry’s gas
consumption increases to 37% in 2040, as energy efficiency improvements reduce energyrelated fuel consumption.
Natural gas use in buildings for space heating, water heating and cooking currently
accounts for 22% of global gas demand, but this share drops to a fifth in 2040. Much of
the seasonality in gas demand stems from gas use in the buildings sector and regional
differences in seasonal heat demand. The buildings sector’s gas consumption increases by
280 bcm over the Outlook period, 30% of that growth coming from China alone. With the
envisaged expansion of China’s gas distribution network, scope for gas to displace coal, oil
and the traditional use of biomass is large in the Chinese buildings sector. In most other
developing countries, ambient temperatures do not leave much room for heating demand
growth, but displacing other fuels for water heating and cooking is still an important growth
opportunity for gas. Lack of gas distribution infrastructure is, however, often a limiting
factor that favours alternatives such as heat pumps, solar thermal or liquefied petroleum
gas (which counts as oil demand). Growth opportunities for gas demand in the buildings
sectors of developed countries are very limited: demand for heating is largely saturated, the
average household size is already small, the energy efficiency of the building infrastructure
is improving (e.g. better insulation of buildings), coal and oil have been widely displaced,
and with solar thermal and heat pumps, new competitors are ready to gain market share –
possibly even without policy support.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Gas demand in the transport sector grows globally by over 160 bcm, reaching some 280 bcm
in 2040. Growth is primarily spurred by road transport which accounts for two-thirds of
the additional gas demand in the transport sector. Most of the remainder is taken up by
marine transport where the role of LNG as a bunker fuel rises rapidly. The United States
leads the growth in gas use in road transport, accounting for nearly 30% of the incremental
worldwide gas consumption to 2040 in road transport, followed by China (21%) and India
(14%). Although the share of natural gas use in transport increases to 5% in 2040 (up from
3% in 2014), natural gas as a fuel for vehicles remains a niche application in most countries
(some notable exceptions are Iran, Pakistan, Argentina and Brazil). The key uncertainty
for the future role of gas in the transport sector remains the dilemma over infrastructure
investment: natural gas-fuelled vehicles are unattractive without an adequate refuelling
infrastructure in place, but without a critical mass of gas-fuelled vehicles, investment into
new natural gas fuel pumps is risky.

Chapter 4 | Natural gas market outlook

175

4

4.3.2 Supply
Resources and reserves
Natural gas is a relatively abundant fuel with remaining technically recoverable resources
close to 800 trillion cubic metres (tcm) at the end of 2015 (Table 4.2). This is sufficient
to comfortably meet production growth to 2040 in all three scenarios of our Outlook.
Unconventional resources currently comprise about 45% of the total gas resource but
this figure is subject to large uncertainties. Outside the United States, our projections
for unconventional gas production pale in comparison to the huge resource estimates,
suggesting that resource availability is not a primary constraint and resource uncertainty
consequently has a minor effect on our modelling in these regions. The situation is different
in the United States, where variations in the estimates of the shale gas resource can have
a marked impact on future gas markets (see Focus below). Total proven reserves of natural
gas have not changed much since WEO-2015, approaching 220 tcm at the end of 2015 thus
suggesting that the drop in gas prices over the last year has not led to a decline in reserves.
Table 4.2 ⊳ Remaining technically recoverable natural gas resources
by type and region, end-2015 (tcm)
Conventional

Unconventional
Tight
gas

Shale
gas

Total

Coalbed
methane

Sub-total

Resources

Proven
reserves

OECD

78

24

81

16

121

199

22

Americas

51

11

55

7

73

124

14

Europe

17

4

13

2

19

37

4

Asia Oceania

10

8

13

8

29

39

4

Non-OECD

356

57

138

34

229

585

195

E. Europe/Eurasia

138

11

15

20

46

184

74

35

13

40

13

66

101

16

104

9

4

-

13

117

80

Africa

51

10

39

0

49

100

17

Latin America

28

15

40

-

55

83

8

434

81

218

50

349

784

217

Asia
Middle East

World

Sources: BGR (2015); BP (2016); Cedigaz (2016); OGJ (2015); US DOE/EIA/ARI (2013); US DOE/EIA (2015); USGS (2012a,
2012b); IEA databases and analysis.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Focus: How would higher US shale gas resources affect the Outlook?
As noted, resource numbers for US shale gas are subject to considerable uncertainties, as
reflected in the large range of estimates from different official and private sources. While
there are variations in the assessment of gas resources for all shale gas plays, the Marcellus
(the biggest play) is at the heart of the uncertainty. Our analysis of the available estimates
of US shale gas resources points to a conceivable range of 14 tcm to 34 tcm. The resource
number that underpins the trends of the New Policies Scenario – 22 tcm as of end-2015
– falls just under midway across this bandwidth; this has been revised upwards compared
with the 16 tcm used in last year’s Outlook.
176

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

To demonstrate the marked impact of resource uncertainty on production trends, we
have conducted an in-depth analysis of the production profiles of 27 shale gas plays,
with varying estimates of their technically recoverable resources. Based on the price
trajectory of the New Policies Scenario, the above-mentioned range of resource estimates
translates into a range of production levels between 470 bcm and just over 900 bcm in
2040 (Figure 4.8). Productivity gains, in terms of wells drilled per rig and ultimate recovery
per well, improve the well economics and thus enable more marginal portions of any given
play to be produced but the main parameter affecting productivity and gas produced is
the assumed quality of the resource (Box 4.2).2 Because of the rapid decline rates of shale
gas wells, producers must continuously scale up drilling activity in order to compensate
for the drop in production from existing wells and expand output. Thus, even under the
most optimistic resource estimate, production growth rates observed in recent years could
hardly be sustained beyond the medium term. We project US shale gas production to reach
a plateau in the latter half of the Outlook period, mainly due to the fact that development
extends progressively into lower quality reservoirs, where initial flow rates are lower than
in the past. A downbeat view on shale gas resources (14 tcm) still implies considerable
growth over the medium term, but rapid decline rates would then lead to a peak in shale
gas output in the early 2020s.

bcm

Figure 4.8 ⊳ US shale gas production as a function of the resource estimate
1 000

Resources:
34 tcm
30 tcm
26 tcm
22 tcm
New Policies Scenario
18 tcm

800
600

14 tcm

400
200

2010

2020

2030

2040

No matter how high the resource estimate is, recent production
growth rates are not sustainable over the long term

© OECD/IEA, 2016

While the shale gas resource estimate is a key parameter for the modelling of our
production trends, variations in the long-term price trajectory can have a similarly striking
effect on production. Based on resources of 22 tcm, the sensitivity of shale gas production
2. We assume a modest annual increase in the number of wells drilled per rig and an increase in expected ultimate
recovery per well of 1.5% per year. Additionally, the natural gas liquids content is taken into account at the play level in
determining the relative economics and development pace for all plays.

Chapter 4 | Natural gas market outlook

177

4

to price is at its largest if the price is between $2-4/MBtu in 2040, with production levels
differing by over 400 bcm (Figure 4.9). For price trajectories above $4/MBtu in 2040, the
price elasticity of shale gas production is markedly reduced, because many of the sweet
spots in a given play have already been exploited at a price of $4/MBtu and the amount of
additional gas that can be economically exploited declines sharply (in other words, the cost
of supply curve for shale gas is flat for prices up to $4/MBtu and then becomes increasingly
steep). Thus, production trajectories with a rapid ramp-up in the first-half of the Outlook
period (such as might result from a price rise in the short term, which is sustained through
to 2040) typically result in peak output reached before the end of the projection period,
as compensating for the rapid decline rates of shale gas wells becomes increasingly more
difficult (see also IEA, 2009). Even if the entire resource of a play becomes economic at
a given price level, the requirement for rigs, skilled workforce and other supply chain
components represents an additional constraint: increasing gas prices spur an expansion
in drilling activity, which pushes up supply chain costs. Nevertheless, a near tripling of
the price path from $4/MBtu in 2040 to $11/MBtu in 2040 would result in an additional
260 bcm of production per year at the end of the projection period. In short, while shale
gas production growth cannot be sustained for long if prices remain significantly below
$4/MBtu over the Outlook period, a steep increase in prices – from the current lows – does
bolster a rapid ramp-up in output growth; but even at high prices production is likely to
peak before 2040.

bcm

Figure 4.9 ⊳ US shale gas production as a function of the price trajectory

Price level in 2040:
$11/MBtu
$9/MBtu
New Policies Scenario $7/MBtu
$5/MBtu

800

600

$4/MBtu
400
$3/MBtu
200
$2/MBtu
2010

2020

2030

2040

© OECD/IEA, 2016

The price elasticity of US shale gas production is high between $2-4/MBtu,
but very low for higher prices
Note: Natural gas prices are based on a smooth trajectory from current price levels to the levels assumed
in 2040.

178

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

Box 4.2 ⊳ Shale well productivity gains: endless rise or diminishing returns?

The productivity of a well is expressed in terms of the amount of gas that can be
produced from it and the rate at which the gas flows to the surface. While the reservoir
quality is the dominant factor in determining well productivity, the design of the
well plays an important role too. In terms of design, the productivity of a horizontal
hydraulically fractured well is mainly determined by the length and orientation of the
horizontal section (or the lateral section) of the well, the number of fracturing stages
and the fracture design (choice of pump pressures and volumes, fracturing fluids and
proppant type). The lateral length and the number of fracturing stages are the main
determinants of cost and there is a trade-off between the additional cost of longer and
more extensively fractured wells and the associated productivity gain. For example,
operators in the largest shale gas play, the Marcellus, have increased lateral lengths
and wells per pad for several years, but more recently the increases are levelling off,
suggesting that an economic optimum has been reached at current gas prices and well
costs (Figure 4.10). The number of wells on a pad, a proxy for how tightly wells can
be spaced in the reservoir, illustrates a trade-off that operators need to make. More
wells on a pad increase the total recovery of the volume of gas in place and provide for
economies of scale, but if the well spacing becomes too tight, the wells often interfere
with and cannibalise each other, resulting in a drop in the flow rate.

5

250

4

200

3

150

2

100

1

50

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

Thousand m3/d

km or number of wells

Figure 4.10 ⊳ Evolution of key well parameters in the Marcellus shale gas play

Left axis:
Average number
of wells per pad
Average lateral
length (km)
Right axis:
Average initial
30-day gas rate

2015

© OECD/IEA, 2016

The average lateral length, number of wells per pad and well productivity
in the Marcellus are all levelling off

Several shale gas plays other than the Marcellus show a similar evolution of key
parameters, such as lateral lengths and wells per pad, but the effect on productivity is not
uniform. This is probably the result of the overriding impact of the quality of the reservoir
and the ability to consistently optimise the productivity trade-off. Operators and service
companies continue to push the limits of what is technically possible to boost productivity,
until the gains and associated costs result in diminishing returns.
Chapter 4 | Natural gas market outlook

179

4

Given the significant upside potential for US shale gas resources, how would a larger
resource estimate than the one used in the New Policies Scenario affect the gas balance
in North America and further afield, especially against the backdrop of a market that is
currently awash with gas? Unsurprisingly, a larger resource base alone will not trigger
a markedly higher production trend: output growth is set to stall sooner or later for
want of gas demand, if market forces or policies do not unlock new opportunities for
consumption growth. But suppose for a moment that US shale gas output was higher than
in our New Policies Scenario. What would be the ripple effects? Moderately higher US
shale gas production levels could be absorbed within North America. A larger resource
base – with a higher number of sweet spots – would put downward pressure on US gas
prices, encouraging further coal-to-gas switching in the power sector and strengthening
the international competitiveness of the domestic industry. Similarly, low cost US shale
gas would increasingly find its way across the borders to Mexico and Canada, displacing
costlier shale gas development there (IEA, 2016c).
However, exceeding the production levels that could be consumed within North America
would also require an expansion of LNG exports, beyond the shipments proposed by the
New Policies Scenario. The competitive position of US gas exports is largely determined by
the cost of the feed gas, i.e. the domestic natural gas price. Even with an optimistic estimate
of resources, US natural gas prices cannot persistently stay at a level that would allow US
LNG exporters to beat Russia or Qatar on a cost basis. Similarly, LNG exports from facilities
whose capital expenditure is sunk could be offered at prices designed to deter large-scale
exports from the United States. A price war could thus defer an expansion of the United
States’ export growth. Unless additional demand is being unlocked, US exporters may be
confined to a strategy of curbing export growth from future LNG projects in Australia,
Africa and Southeast Asia once the current oversupply is absorbed. Supplemental US
gas exports entering international trade in the early 2020s could have the positive sideeffect of reducing volatility at a time when the market is expected to tighten as current
overcapacity is being absorbed. From an energy security perspective, a larger role for the
United States is desirable, helping various importers to diversify their supply mix (although
the importance attached to diversity might also prove a limitation on US exports at higher
volumes). There are other non-technical elements that might add to resource uncertainty
and might in practice constrain growth of shale gas production. Wide public acceptance
is critical for successful expansion of shale gas production, but public opposition has won
political backing and fracking bans have been put in place in various parts of the United
States (e.g. in New York state), providing a further reason to be cautious about very bullish
outlooks for US shale gas.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Production
In the New Policies Scenario, global gas production increases from 3 540 bcm in 2014 to
around 5 220 bcm in 2040, an average annual growth rate of 1.5% (Table 4.3). The growth
in gas production is dominated by unconventional gas, which ramps up at 3.5% per year,
reaching some 1 700 bcm in 2040.
180

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

Table 4.3 ⊳ Natural gas production by region in the New Policies Scenario (bcm)
OECD

2014-2040

2000

2014

2020

2025

2030

2035

2040

1 109

1 270

1 409

1 434

1 485

1 558

1 618

348

Change

CAAGR*
0.9%

Americas

765

939

1 046

1 070

1 121

1 187

1 239

300

1.1%

Canada

182

164

156

151

155

184

223

59

1.2%

Mexico
United States
Europe
Norway

37

45

40

41

42

50

60

15

1.1%

544

729

850

878

923

952

954

226

1.0%

303

260

220

205

194

184

178

- 82

-1.4%

53

113

109

98

91

87

85

- 28

-1.1%

Asia Oceania

42

71

143

159

170

186

201

130

4.1%

Australia

33

63

134

152

164

181

197

134

4.5%

Non-OECD

1 396

2 267

2 393

2 672

2 981

3 300

3 600

1 334

1.8%

726

858

879

949

1 020

1 095

1 145

287

1.1%

6

19

25

35

43

51

55

36

4.1%

573

630

636

668

698

730

758

128

0.7%

47

80

97

119

142

166

181

101

3.2%

E. Europe/Eurasia
Azerbaijan
Russia
Turkmenistan
Asia
China

248

460

494

545

619

686

756

296

1.9%

27

130

172

211

255

298

341

211

3.8%

India

28

33

34

41

61

75

89

56

3.9%

Indonesia

70

75

73

84

102

117

130

55

2.1%

Middle East

198

559

613

706

784

865

955

396

2.1%

Iran

59

175

198

238

272

297

316

142

2.3%

Qatar

25

160

166

176

188

209

230

70

1.4%

Saudi Arabia
Africa
Algeria
Mozambique
Nigeria

38

85

99

114

127

138

148

63

2.1%

124

214

230

282

341

395

447

234

2.9%

82

83

84

93

105

111

112

29

1.2%

0

4

5

16

33

50

68

64

11.6%

12

42

42

45

51

62

75

33

2.2%

Latin America

100

176

178

190

218

258

297

121

2.0%

Argentina

41

39

42

51

70

90

106

67

3.9%

7

23

27

31

41

61

80

58

5.0%

2 506

3 536

3 802

4 106

4 466

4 858

5 219

1 682

1.5%

264

153

112

102

96

90

84

- 69

-2.3%

195

643

845

956

1 041

1 127

1 193

550

2.4%

12

58

111

184

293

403

511

453

8.7%

207

701

956

1 140

1 334

1 530

1 704

1 003

3.5%

Brazil
World
European Union
Unconventional
OECD
Non-OECD
World

© OECD/IEA, 2016

* Compound annual average growth rate.

Among the various unconventional gas types, shale gas accounts for two-thirds of the
production growth, followed by coalbed methane (19%) and tight gas (11%). The United
States, Canada and Australia continue to lead global unconventional gas development over
the medium term, but during the 2020s production starts gaining momentum in other
Chapter 4 | Natural gas market outlook

181

4

unconventional gas resource-rich countries, notably China and Argentina. Although various
countries make progress in developing their unconventional resources, especially shale gas,
replicating the North American experience is not an easy matter and our unconventional
gas production outlook is subject to considerable uncertainty. Conventional gas production,
while increasing at a much more moderate pace of 0.8% annually, still accounts for about
two-thirds of global gas supply in 2040. As in previous editions of the World Energy Outlook,
all major regions, except Europe, are projected to increase their gas production.

4.3.3 Regional demand and supply insights
United States
Natural gas demand in the United States increases from just under 760 bcm in 2014 to
some 840 bcm in 2040. The annual average growth rate of 0.4% is markedly lower than the
global average. Currently one-third of the gas is consumed in the power sector, another
third in buildings and over a fifth in industry. Gas consumption jumped in 2015, primarily
underpinned by strong growth from the power sector where, for the first time, as much
power was generated from gas as from coal. Gas-fired power generation faces headwinds
over the medium term: the increase in gas prices to some $4/MBtu in 2020 slightly weakens
the competitive position of gas vis-à-vis coal and the recent tax credit extensions for wind
and solar are stimulating additional deployment of these technologies and thus effectively
limiting the growth potential for gas over the medium term. In the long term, gas use in the
power sector increases to nearly 290 bcm, up from 250 bcm in 2014 and output from gas
power plants reaches 1 480 terawatt-hours (TWh), up 27% from 2014 levels (based on 2015
gas-fired generation estimates, growth to 2040 stands only at 7%).

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Price is clearly not the only determining factor in gas-to-coal competition. The Clean Power
Plan, which aims to reduce power sector CO2 emissions by 32% in 2030 (compared with
2005 levels), helps the outlook for gas-fired power generation. However, uncertainties
remain: assuming that overall emission reductions targets remain unchanged, faster
deployment of renewables increases the CO2 budget available for power generation from
fossil fuels and thus reduces the need to displace coal in achieving targets (see Chapter 5).
Although there is significant potential for fuel switching on a short-term basis, a persistent
price-driven shift away from coal in power generation would require gas prices to remain
below $3/MBtu for a sustained period of time (Figure 4.11). Yet, our analysis also suggests
that such price levels are incompatible with continued growth in shale gas production. The
coal and gas price trajectories of the New Policies Scenario make the United States one of
the few regions where coal-to-gas switching is underpinned by economics. However, the
rate at which gas grows in power generation remains sensitive to policy developments,
both to back out coal and to support renewables.
The structurally lower natural gas prices in the United States lead to a change in the global
landscape of gas-based chemicals production: underpinned by low feedstock prices,
basic chemicals production in the United States increases strongly over the medium term
(including the re-location of petrochemical industries from other parts of the world). In the
182

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

coming five years, the US chemical industry accounts for over a quarter of the worldwide
increase in feedstock use. The United States also sees one of the strongest increases in
natural gas use in transport, with an additional 30 bcm consumed in road transport (mainly
heavy-duty vehicles) over the Outlook period.

Gas price in dollars per MBtu (2015)

Figure 4.11 ⊳ US power sector gas demand as a function of the coal price

4

8

6

2010

4

2009 2011

2013

High coal price
2012

2

100

2014

150

200

250

Low coal price

300

350

Medium coal price

400
450
500
550
Power sector gas demand (bcm)

The potential for fuel switching is large for prices below $3/MBtu,
but this is also where shale gas production is very elastic

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Notes: Orange diamonds represent historical price-demand combinations for the past six years. Low coal price
corresponds to $50/tonne on average, medium coal price to $55/tonne and high coal price to $60/tonne.

The United States’ gas output reaches more than 950 bcm in 2040, over 30% higher than
in 2014. Our upward revision of the estimated shale gas resource to 22 tcm results in a
more upbeat production trend (in 2040 US gas production is nearly 100 bcm higher than in
WEO-2015). Shale gas production continues to increase rapidly over the coming years
but then tapers off at some 660-670 bcm after 2030. The long-term plateau in shale
gas production is largely compensated by increasing production of tight gas resulting
in continued growth of the country’s unconventional gas production throughout the
projection period. Conventional gas production continues its decline through the mid-2025s
but then stabilises between 90 bcm and 100 bcm for the rest of the projection period. The
strong growth in unconventional gas production affects the country’s trade position in two
important ways: first, it underpins a rapid ramp-up in US exports of LNG over the medium
term, the conditions for which (in terms of infrastructure investments) were established
over the last few years. Second, the ample availability of relatively cheap US natural gas
dampens the prospects of investment into shale gas production in Canada and Mexico,
with the result that production growth in the two countries picks up only in the latter half
of the projection period. The low gas prices seen over the past few years have spurred
cross-border pipeline development to Mexico, which enable growing pipeline exports to
Chapter 4 | Natural gas market outlook

183

Mexico within the medium term. For Canada, the US shale gas boom implies a continued
decline of its pipeline exports to the United States. The combination of these factors leads
to the much anticipated switch in the net trade position of the United States, within the
medium term, from a net importer of gas to a net exporter, with major implications for
international gas trade. US net exports reach 70 bcm in the mid-2020s and then increase
further to 110 bcm in 2040.

Russia
Russia should be well placed to take advantage of the world’s rising needs for gas. The
country has vast gas resources, low production costs and more than 100 bcm of spare
production capacity since the new production facilities in the remote Yamal Peninsula
came on stream; but, in practice, the problems facing the Russian gas industry are no less
impressive than the size of its resources. Domestic consumption is plateauing; gas already
accounts for more than half of Russian primary energy demand and even modest efficiency
gains in the power sector, industry and buildings will be sufficient to keep future growth in
check. In our projections, gas demand for power falls by some 20 bcm over the projection
period, while total consumption stays flat at around 450 bcm.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Pipeline infrastructure ties Russian export opportunities at present to the vagaries of gas
demand in Europe, but the opportunities there have been constrained. Ukraine, hitherto
one of the largest buyers of Russian gas (some 40 bcm as recently as 2011), has cut direct
imports of Russian gas to a minimum (but receives a growing volume of Russian gas through
the backdoor via its western neighbours). Falling European production has been outpaced
by the drop in gas demand in the European Union, meaning that the region’s import needs
have not grown as Russia anticipated. At least for the medium term, Russia also faces
strong competition in European markets from a well-supplied LNG market in which Europe
is becoming the “buyer of last resort” for excess LNG volumes. We anticipate that, under
these circumstances, Gazprom makes efforts to defend its market share in Europe and
Russia’s total exports rise back above 200 bcm by the end of the decade. While this would
mark an increase over 2014 – a year that saw exports dropping to less than 180 bcm – it
would not exceed the levels seen in other recent years.
The key longer term challenge for the Russian gas industry is to unlock new export markets
through the development of gas fields and the provision of pipelines to Asian markets,
as well as LNG terminals that can provide Russia with more options in its export strategy.
These upstream and infrastructure projects, which require huge upfront investments,
need to be developed against the backdrop of lower revenue from oil and gas exports
(due to the drop in fuel prices), international sanctions and considerable uncertainty about
demand growth, especially in Asia. In our projections, these new export arteries take time
to develop but – starting with Novatek’s Yamal LNG project and then the Power of Siberia
pipeline to China – they begin to lift the infrastructure constraint from the early 2020s. As
a result, Russia’s net exports increase to over 300 bcm in 2040, with the contribution from
LNG rising from 8% today (the Sakhalin LNG project) to over 20% in 2040.
184

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

Middle East
The Middle East region as a whole holds nearly 40% of global proven gas reserves. The region
is diverse but its countries share a common challenge in our Outlook: policy-makers need to
find ways to address above-ground risks (e.g. institutional and regulatory barriers) to ensure
that a gas-rich region does not fall short of gas supply and cross-border pipeline projects
advance. This is not an easy matter, as gas demand is projected to surge by some 360 bcm
(only Chinese gas demand grows by more) in the period to 2040 (Figure 4.12). The power
sector leads the demand growth, with an additional 150 bcm of gas burn. Power generation
from gas plants grows two-and-a-half times and the share of gas in the region’s power mix
increases to nearly 70%, while the share of oil tumbles (from more than a third in 2014 to just
over 10% in 2040). This trend is partially underpinned by the region’s growing freshwater
needs which lead to a surge in seawater desalination in gas-fired plants that combine power
generation with freshwater production (see Chapter 9). Industrial gas use grows by over
100 bcm, with over 35% of this coming from the non energy-intensive industries where
switching away from oil is (similar to the trends in power generation), a major driving force.
Figure 4.12 ⊳ Natural gas demand by sector and supply by country

bcm

in the Middle East in the New Policies Scenario

1 000

Demand and exports

Production

Exports
Demand:
Other
Buildings
Industry*
Power

800
600

Production:
Other
Iraq
Saudi Arabia
Qatar
Iran

400
200

2014

2020

2030

2040

2014

2020

2030

2040

The region’s role as a net exporter hinges on
the ability of key producers to expand output

© OECD/IEA, 2016

* Industry includes gas used as petrochemical feedstocks and energy consumption in blast furnaces.

Over the period to 2040, natural gas demand growth in the Middle East continues to be
underpinned by the availability of gas at subsidised prices, despite some recent progress
in phasing out subsidies in various countries. For instance, energy pricing reforms in
Saudi Arabia, Oman and Bahrain have led to a jump in natural gas prices in these three
countries (albeit from a very low level). Countries in the Middle East face a trade-off
between politically unpopular gas price increases (the business model of a multitude of
industrial consumers is built on low cost gas supply) and the lack of incentive to develop
Chapter 4 | Natural gas market outlook

185

4

new upstream projects at low prices. Oman – the second-largest LNG exporter in the
region – is a good example: the country has recently deferred LNG shipments to Asia and
started cutting back on contracted volumes, as production cannot keep up with runaway
domestic gas demand.
The Middle East has the resource potential to significantly increase its gas production,
underpinning our projection that the region adds some 400 bcm per year to the global
gas balance over the period to 2040 (the region’s gas production is on a par with that
of the United States at the end of the Outlook period). Whether the conditions above
ground allow for such an expansion is an open question: security concerns and political
considerations could continue to constrain investment, as could a shortage of investment
capital so long as international hydrocarbon prices and domestic gas prices remain low.
In our projections, Iran contributes most to the region’s growth in production, accounting
for around one-third of the incremental output. The lifting of the main international
sanctions earlier this year provided more of a boost to oil output than to gas (gas
projects at Iran’s huge South Pars field were slowed, but not halted, during the period of
sanctions and have steadily lifted national gas output). Iranian production is projected
to increase by some 25 bcm per year over the next five years and another 120 bcm
thereafter, as investment in new projects gathers pace. Alongside domestic needs and
some exports within the Middle East, Iran’s pipeline connections outside the region are
assumed to be reinforced with a new link to Pakistan and expanded export to Turkey. Iraq
sees the second-largest increase in gas production in the region, with output reaching
over 85 bcm in 2040, up from less than 10 bcm in 2014. Above-ground risks and barriers
push the surge in the country’s gas production back into the second-half of the Outlook
period. Gas investment has recently gained momentum in Saudi Arabia with the Wasit
project starting production this year and Saudi Aramco signing off on the $13 billion
Fadhili gas project. Saudi Arabian gas production increases by nearly 65 bcm to some
150 bcm in 2040. However, Qatar remains the primary source of the region’s exports: if
not for Qatar the Middle East’s trade surplus would dwindle. Based on the assumption
that the moratorium on further expansion of the North Field is lifted by the mid-2020s,
Qatar’s gas production increases by 70 bcm over the period; the additional gas is almost
entirely geared towards exports. Total net exports from the Middle East increase from
just under 120 bcm in 2014 to around 145 bcm in 2040.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

China
China becomes a central player in global natural gas markets in the New Policies Scenario,
even though gas still constitutes only 12% of the country’s primary energy mix by 2040. No
other country’s gas consumption or imports grow by more, in absolute terms, than that
of China over the Outlook period. Chinese gas consumption tops 600 bcm in 2040, some
415 bcm higher than today’s levels. Demand in the power sector grows by a factor of five,
reaching 170 bcm at the end of the projection period. Gas takes on various roles in the
power system, as a source of peaking power and flexibility in an increasingly renewables186

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

rich system, as well as a less polluting alternative to coal-burn in densely populated urban
areas. Efforts to simplify and deregulate natural gas prices are underway and this helps
to improve the fuel’s competitive position over the medium term, particularly against oil
products. But the share of gas in the country’s power mix stays well below 10%, highlighting
that imported gas appears, in the Chinese context, to be an expensive way to satisfy
electricity demand.
With 225 bcm of natural gas use in 2040, up from 65 bcm today, the industry sector in
China exhibits the largest absolute growth of all sectors and accounts for nearly 40% of
the country’s incremental gas use over the Outlook period. While economic growth is the
principal determinant of gas demand growth in the industry sector, China is one of the few
countries where significant scope remains for gas to displace coal in industrial use. Gas
makes inroads especially in the non energy-intensive industry (textiles, machinery etc.)
where coal use in smaller industrial boilers is still common today, contributing significantly
to China’s air quality problems. Nearly 80 bcm out of an additional 105 bcm of gas used
in the non energy-intensive industries over the Outlook period can be attributed to fuel
switching (mainly from coal, to a lesser degree from oil). Gas demand in buildings increases
by over 85 bcm (around 20% of total demand growth) between 2014 and 2040. Expanding
the distribution grid in the China’s northern and north-eastern provinces is a policy
priority that underpins the strong growth in gas-based heating in households. China’s
transportation sector sees demand growth of more than 25 bcm over the period, reaching
nearly 45 bcm in 2040.
China’s gas production increases by some 210 bcm, standing at 340 bcm in 2040.
Conventional gas output is on a rising trend, but is set to reach a plateau in the early
2020s, at around 100 bcm. As discussed in detail in WEO-2015, the potential for
unconventional gas production is large in China but comes with considerable uncertainty.3
The New Policies Scenario sees an increase in unconventional gas output of 215 bcm in
China over the projection period – growth that is only topped by the United States – but
the number pales in comparison with the huge resource estimates. Shale gas is the main
contributor to enhanced production with output expanding by 90 bcm, followed by coalbed
methane at nearly 45 bcm, tight gas and coal-to-gas at around 40 bcm.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Gas exporters around the world place their hopes on a surge in Chinese imports to absorb
the current overcapacity. We project Chinese net imports of gas to increase by some
210 bcm through 2040, with 120 bcm of import growth in the coming ten years alone.
Over 70% of the import growth in the period to 2025 is supplied by pipeline, as imports
from Turkmenistan and Myanmar are joined by Russian exports through the “Power of
Siberia” connection. The long term sees a stronger contribution from LNG to Chinese gas
import growth and, by 2040, the share of LNG imports in total net imports reaches a level
of nearly 45%.

3. World Energy Outlook-2017 will feature an in-depth and comprehensive assessment of China’s energy prospects.

Chapter 4 | Natural gas market outlook

187

4

European Union
Natural gas consumption in the European Union recovers somewhat, to over 450 bcm in
2040 from 418 bcm in 2014, but consumption stays well below the historical demand peak
reached in 2010. The bulk of the growth comes from the power sector: the EU targets a cut
in greenhouse-gas emissions by 40% (compared with 1990 levels) in 2030, which creates
room for gas use to expand as coal plants retire. Our projections indicate the need for more
than 170 gigawatts (GW) of new gas-fired capacity in the European Union over the next
25 years. Whether the design of Europe’s power market offers sufficient incentive for this
capacity to be built is an important uncertainty. The rise in renewables has pushed current
wholesale electricity prices down below the levels that would allow gas plants to run at
adequately high load factors (various gas plants have been mothballed in recent years), let
alone the levels that trigger new investment.
Figure 4.13 ⊳ Natural gas imports in the European Union by exporter
bcm

and transport mode in the New Policies Scenario

400

LNG:
Other
North America
North Africa
Middle East
Russia

300

200

Pipeline:
Other
North Africa
Middle East
Norway
Russia

100

2014

2020

2030

2040

© OECD/IEA, 2016

EU gas imports grow, but supplier diversity
increases not least due to a boost in LNG trade

With domestic gas production in decline – we project a drop of 45% over the Outlook
period – the region’s net-gas imports grow to some 380 bcm in 2040. As the world’s largest
gas-importing region, security of supply has always been a key concern of European policymakers. Dependency on Russian exports has been the main focus of the debate. The
projections in the New Policies Scenario suggest that Russia is set to remain the largest
single supplier of gas to the EU. However, despite growth in absolute terms in gas imports
from Russia, the share of Russia in EU imports drops from 43% today to 35% in 2040.
A decline in Norwegian volumes (due to depletion of large fields) is compensated for by
imports from a wide range of other suppliers including LNG from Qatar, the United States,
Canada and various African exporters (Figure 4.13). The boost in LNG imports is facilitated
by a well-developed gas infrastructure (much existing regasification capacity is currently
188

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

underutilised) and a well-functioning internal gas market. By 2040, the share of pipeline
imports has dropped from nearly 90% in 2014 to two-thirds. With Middle Eastern and
Caspian countries – most notably Azerbaijan – looking for ways to supply Europe along the
southern corridor, supplier diversity in terms of pipeline imports is also on the rise.

Other countries/regions
The Caspian region holds large resources of relatively low cost gas, but bringing this to
markets is not a straightforward task for these landlocked countries. Output growth over
the period to 2040 is projected to remain constrained by infrastructure rather than by
shortage of resources or economic considerations. The region nevertheless adds 150 bcm
to the global gas balance by 2040. Turkmenistan accounts for two-thirds of the incremental
production; this is largely due to further development of the super-giant Galkynysh field and
expansion of the large-scale pipeline interconnections to China (these reach a combined
capacity of 85 bcm once the fourth line, Line D, is assumed to start operation in the mid2020s). Turkmenistan continues to seek other outlets for gas supply, especially now that
exports to Russia – the country’s traditional market – have dried up. But progress with
other pipeline projects, to the south (Afghanistan-Pakistan-India) or to the west (feeding
the southern corridor to Europe) faces significant political and commercial challenges. Of
the various additional options for Turkmenistan, we cautiously expect some Turkmen gas
to find its way to new markets: if new dedicated projects across Afghanistan or across the
Caspian Sea prove impossible, then another approach would be to expand Turkmenistan’s
exports to Iran, thereby freeing up additional gas in Iran’s balance for export to Turkey
or Pakistan. To the west of the Caspian Sea, Azerbaijan seizes the opportunity to place
growing volumes of gas on the European market via the corridor through Turkey and
southeast Europe, underpinning a growth in the country’s production by 35 bcm (most of
it after 2020) to 55 bcm in 2040.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Natural gas demand in India increases nearly four-fold, reaching around 190 bcm in
2040. Around half of the growth in demand comes from power generation, where gas
remains – despite the strong growth – a minor element in the mix, with only one-out-often megawatt-hours generated by gas plants in 2040. The recently announced gas pricing
reforms strengthen the incentives for upstream gas developments, yet much of India’s
conventional gas production comes from complex offshore projects and is projected to
take time to develop (IEA, 2015). Similarly, unconventional gas production takes time to
materialise. A boost to India’s gas production is therefore not to be expected before the
mid-2020s. In the long term, gas production in India rises to some 90 bcm. These volumes
are insufficient to meet demand, requiring imports to rise to 100 bcm in 2040. The bulk of
these imports are set to come in the form of LNG but we see potential for pipeline imports
from the late 2020s, despite considerable political and commercial obstacles.
Gas production in Southeast Asia declines moderately through the early 2020s, but picks up
in the latter half of the 2020s, when price levels justify the development of some complex
fields, so that production reaches nearly 250 bcm in 2040 (up from just over 220 bcm in
Chapter 4 | Natural gas market outlook

189

4

2014). Malaysia – with 70 bcm of output, the second-largest producer in the region – sees
its output steadily fall to around 50 bcm by 2040, as declines from existing fields are only
partially offset by the development of new resources. In the long term, hopes for growth
in the region’s output rest on new fields in Indonesia to propel gas output upwards with
the development of new fields. The biggest prospect is the East Natuna project (Asia’s
largest untapped gas field), but it is expensive and technically challenging, due to the
high CO2 content of the field. Key contributions to Indonesia’s output growth also come
from the “Indonesia Deepwater Development” project and development of the country’s
significant coalbed methane resources. More than offsetting declines in mature fields, the
various new projects bring production to 130 bcm in Indonesia in 2040. Despite growing
exports from Indonesia the region as a whole becomes a net importer of natural gas in the­
mid-2030s as Southeast Asian gas demand increases by 40%.
The emergence of new players shapes the natural gas production outlook for Africa.
Tanzania and Mozambique, both exploiting East Africa’s offshore resources, join the
incumbent producers, Nigeria, Algeria, Angola and Egypt, to double the continent’s
gas output in the period to 2040. The production trend roughly follows two phases. A
first phase of moderate growth extends into the early 2020s, primarily spurred by the­
ramp-up of the newly discovered Zohr field in Egypt. This is followed by a rapid growth
phase that sees the take-off of various LNG projects off the coast in East Africa and the
advent of unconventional gas production in Algeria. From the 2030s onward, Mozambique
and Tanzania dominate production growth, together accounting for more than 35% of the
continent’s additional annual gas production of 235 bcm over the Outlook period. Africa
is not short of outlets for its gas: the continent’s own gas needs are growing rapidly and
exports also increase to over 130 bcm, of which over three-quarters come in the form of
LNG.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Australia has seen an unprecedented wave of LNG development in the past couple of years,
which, when all plants are operational, will enable it to overtake Qatar as the largest global
exporter of LNG around 2020. The industry has been suffering from a double whammy
of huge cost-overruns and project completion right at a time of gas oversupply. With
the drop in gas prices, Australian LNG development has lost steam (for instance, since
2014, Shell has cancelled its Arrow LNG project, Woodside has further postponed a final
investment decision on Browse Floating-LNG and BHP Billiton has lowered the priority of
its Scarborough project) and we expect the industry to take a cautious approach to new
investments. Despite individual projects still coming to fruition over the projection period,
the country does not experience another LNG boom over the Outlook period, with capital
expenditure concentrated on brownfield expansion. This is reflected in the production
trend: Australian gas production grows by 135 bcm in the coming 25 years (mostly exportoriented) but 55% of this growth occurs over the next five years.
Natural gas demand in Canada increases from around 105 bcm today to 165 bcm in 2040,
a remarkable growth rate of 1.7% per year (the volumetric demand growth is only around
25 bcm less than that of the United States over the period). Nearly 30% of the additional
190

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

demand comes from the power sector, backing out coal: gas more than doubles its share in
the country’s power generation mix to over 20%. With an additional 12 bcm, a significant
amount of additional gas demand comes from the oil and gas industry itself: increasing
amounts of gas are consumed in the steam-assisted gravity drainage process used for the
extraction of oil from oil sands in western Canada. Gas production is relatively flat through
the mid-2020s, when conventional production bottoms out and shale gas production
becomes the main driver of the production trend. Production increases to almost 225 bcm
in 2040. With declining pipeline exports to the United States, Canada’s net exports decline
until around 2030 (market conditions have taken a toll on export prospects from the west
coast, e.g. recently Shell suspended its Canada LNG project indefinitely) when a wave of
new LNG projects ramps up and propels net exports to some 60 bcm in 2040. In light of the
LNG oversupply, the key challenge remains the development of the costly long-distance
pipelines from producing areas to the coast, which includes finding a compromise with the
First Nations about pipelines crossing their territories.

Focus: Is the Dead Cow going to bring Argentina’s gas outlook to life? 4
Latin America holds significant natural gas resources, estimated at some 83 tcm, of
which two-thirds are unconventional resources. The largest resource-holder is Argentina:
according to the US Energy Information Administration, Argentina is second only to China
(and above the United States) in the size of its recoverable shale gas resource (Figure 4.14).
Within Argentina, the most promising area is the Neuquén basin, and in particular the
Vaca Muerta (Dead Cow) play, which has huge potential both as a source of tight oil and of
shale gas. It is a relatively new play: the first shale gas well that was hydraulically fractured
was completed in 2010, but activity did not really pick up until 2013, when YPF, Argentina’s
state-controlled oil and gas company, began a more intensive programme of appraisal and
development. In total, around 600 wells have been drilled thus far, the majority of these by
YPF, although several international majors (ExxonMobil, Chevron, Shell) and some smaller
independent and Argentinian operators are also stepping up their presence. Most of the
initial wells drilled were vertical, but larger scale drilling of horizontal wells with hydraulic
fracturing began in late 2014 and, by the end of 2015, around 10% of the producing wells
were horizontal – a sign that the engineers were becoming increasingly confident about
their knowledge of the reservoir and the location of some of the more productive areas.
Shale gas currently accounts for less than 1% of Argentina’s 39 bcm of annual production,
but some early signs of a shift in momentum are apparent.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Our long-term assessment of Argentina’s shale gas production is relatively upbeat, but it will
take time for unconventional gas production to take-off. The size and apparent quality of
the resource base is a critical factor for our long-term view: much remains to be discovered
about the unconventional potential of the Vaca Muerta, but the information available
thus far suggests that it bears comparison with some of the best performing US plays,
4. This analysis is drawn in part from the proceedings of the 4th IEA Unconventional Gas Forum, held in Buenos Aires
on 21 April 2016.

Chapter 4 | Natural gas market outlook

191

4

such as the Eagle Ford in south Texas.5 The province is sparsely populated, limiting the
risk of disruption to existing communities, yet not too remote. There is reasonable access
to water from the Neuquén and Limay Rivers, as well as Lake Nahuel-Huapi. Moreover,
the basin has a long pedigree in conventional oil and gas (now in decline), and so has
pipeline and other infrastructure already in place, alongside a well-established upstream
and services industry. In addition, there is a strong policy rationale and an increasingly
favourable regulatory environment for Argentina to develop these resources. Gas accounts
for half of Argentina’s primary energy demand but, despite its resource wealth, the country
became a net-gas importer in 2008 – by pipeline from Bolivia and via two regasification
terminals for LNG – and policy is focussed on turning this trend around. The desire to
bring in new investment has brought forward changes in the upstream, including a fixed
$7.5/MBtu wellhead price for domestic shale and tight gas, as well as broader shifts that
have reduced the barriers to trade and financing.
Figure 4.14 ⊳ Main shale gas resource-holders and Latin America’s
share in global shale gas resources, end-2015
32

China
Argentina

23

United States

22

Algeria

Latin
America
18%

20

Canada

16

Mexico

15
10

Rest of world
82%

20

30

40
tcm

Argentina is estimated to have the second-largest shale gas resource in the world

© OECD/IEA, 2016

On the other hand, current market conditions provide a ready alternative source of gas
in the form of imported LNG, while the low price environment has taken a toll on capital
availability for upstream spending by YPF and others. And there are other limitations and
uncertainties. One immediate issue is the relatively weak supply chain for equipment,
services and logistics; strengthening this chain will take time and a critical mass of upstream
activity (the latter depending, in turn, on the availability of competitively priced services
and supplies). For the moment, this still means the costs of production are relatively
high: average costs are around $11 million for a typical horizontal well, but drilling and
5. For example, well depths in the Vaca Muerta and the Eagle Ford are similar (2 000-3 000 metres); the strata containing
economically producible hydrocarbons, the “net pay”, is around 40-60 metres thick in the Eagle Ford, but 70-100 metres
in the Vaca Muerta (which is why vertical wells can still be profitable in some areas); indicators such as total organic
content, pressure and clay content are in comparable ranges.
192

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

completion costs are still well above those in the United States. More upstream players will
be needed to spur the culture of innovation and learning-by-doing that has driven down
costs and unlocked the potential of the US plays. Over the longer term, uncertainty over
future policies and regulation also clouds the outlook for Argentina, given the country’s
history of government intervention in the oil and gas sectors. And, last but far from
least, the prospect of rapid population growth in the resource-rich areas and the need to
develop a tailored permitting and compliance regime raise questions about the social and
environmental aspects of unconventional resource development and the administrative
capacity to handle it. As we have argued elsewhere (IEA, 2012), public authorities need to
anticipate future strains on infrastructure and regulatory capacity and take advance action
to alleviate them, or they run the risk of losing public confidence when problems occur.
Figure 4.15 ⊳ Natural gas production by country and gas type in
bcm

South America and Mexico in the New Policies Scenario

Conventional

300

Unconventional

Other
Trinidad and
Tobago
Argentina
Brazil
Mexico
Venezuela

250
200
150
100
50
2014

2020

2030

2040

2014

2020

2030

2040

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Shale gas in Argentina provides a major boost to South America’s gas production

Despite the many hurdles to be overcome, Argentina is the only country in South America
in our projections that succeeds in mobilising unconventional gas at scale, although Mexico
also starts developing its large resources towards the end of the projection period. In
Mexico’s case, the proximity of a large and intensively developed resource in the United
States and the construction of large new cross-border pipeline capacity postpones the time
at which indigenous resource development becomes commercially attractive: shale gas
output starts to pick up only around 2030 and reaches some 15 bcm in 2040.6 The big
ramp-up in Argentina’s shale output is projected to start a little earlier, in the mid-2020s,
and reaches over 40 bcm by 2040. It provides a major boost to overall South American gas
output: between 2025 and 2040, unconventional gas is responsible for 60% of the rise in
regional gas production (Figure 4.15).
6. A special country focus Mexico Energy Outlook: World Energy Outlook Special Report considers unconventional
prospects in Mexico in more detail. Available at: www.worldenergyoutlook.org/mexico.

Chapter 4 | Natural gas market outlook

193

4

4.3.4 Trade7
Inter-regional gas trade has increased by 70% over the past 25 years and is projected to
rise another 70% over the Outlook period. By 2040, over 1 100 bcm of gas are traded
between regions – some 460 bcm more than in 2014; 45% of the additional trade is set
to materialise over the next ten years, promising a very dynamic period for importers and
exporters alike (Table 4.4). This time frame sees a gas market in flux: LNG over capacity
is gradually absorbed, new players enter the stage, long-established market mechanisms
are gradually overthrown and gas prices rebound as the market rebalances. At the same
time the gas industry faces a major challenge as it needs to cushion the transition from
structural oversupply to a market in balance. This implies that the industry – due to longlead times – needs to mobilise fresh capital to develop new projects at a time when it just
comes off a major bust phase.

bcm

Figure 4.16 ⊳ Change in gas imports by region in the New Policies Scenario
200

Other
European Union
Other Asia
India
China
Japan and Korea
Net trade growth

150
100
50
0
- 50
-100

2010-14

2014-20

2020-25

2025-30

2030-35

2035-40

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Asia is the engine for incremental gas imports with growth
opportunities being limited elsewhere after the mid-2020s

Import growth in Asia – China, India, Pakistan and various other countries – provides not
only a home for currently uncontracted LNG but also a pointer for the long-term evolution
of trade (Figure 4.16). Over the medium term, the partial recovery of gas demand in the
European Union leads to a temporary surge in the region’s gas import growth, even though
much of this upswing serves only to reverse the marked decline seen between 2010 and
2014. From the early 2020s, European import growth is robust and contributes – together
with strong growth in Asian gas import demand – to exceptionally rapid trade growth in
that period. Our projections suggest that, around 2025, the current surplus in LNG capacity
has by-and-large disappeared.
7. Unless otherwise stated, trade figures in this chapter reflect volumes traded between countries/regions modelled in
the WEO, and therefore they do not include intra-regional trade.
194

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Chapter 4 | Natural gas market outlook

Figure 4.17 ⊳ Selected global gas trade flows in the New Policies Scenario (bcm)

14

22

28 160

187 238

25
9

31 66

7

15

21

53 54
9

6

19

23

52 27
36
28

63 20

14

28 160

27 37

10 37
15

2014 2040

7

6

16 23

5

45

30

15

5

34

9
19

49

6

Europe

Middle East

Japan and Korea

Russia and Caspian

India
China

Other Asia
Australia

Africa

North America
South America

This map is without prejudice to the status of or sovereignty over any territory, to the delimitation of international frontiers and boundaries and to the name of any territory, city or area.

195

The strong import growth in Asia underpins a fundamental shift in trade flows away from the Atlantic basin to the Asia-Pacific region

4

The concentration of import growth in Asia continues to redraw the inter-regional gas
trade map, underpinning a fundamental shift in trade flows away from the Atlantic basin to
the Asia-Pacific region (Figure 4.17). Large pipeline projects come online over the Outlook
period in Asia, for instance the connections between Russia and China, the reinforcement
of China’s connection to Turkmenistan and lines linking South Asia with the gas fields in
the Middle East and the Caspian region. However, in a market awash with LNG, capitalintensive and complex pipeline projects find it hard to garner support; this encompasses
both the financial and political dimension. Various pipeline projects have recently seen their
timeline reassessed, for instance the Eastern and Western Siberian pipelines connecting
Russia and China. The former does not reach peak capacity before the mid-2020s and the
latter is not expected to come into service before the mid-2030s in our projections. As
a result, LNG manages to capture the bulk of import demand growth and sees its share
in inter-regional gas trade increase from 42% in 2014 to 53% in 2040 (Figure 4.18). The
growth in global LNG trade also benefits from increasing deployment of floating storage
and regasification technology (FSRU), which helps to unlock smaller gas markets (Box 4.3).
Bangladesh is a good example: the potential for gas demand growth is large, but it starts
from a low base. A pipeline project would be economically prohibitive, as the volumes
are too small to achieve the economies of scale needed to keep the costs in check. FSRU
technology can help to create pockets of growth in countries that were not in the focus of
LNG exporters until recently.
Table 4.4 ⊳ Natural gas trade by region in the New Policies Scenario

As a share of demand

2014

2025

2040

2014

2025

2040

European Union

-265

-374

-379

63%

79%

82%

-58

-176

-268

31%

45%

44%

-174

-144

-147

98%

98%

99%

-18

-54

-100

35%

57%

53%

Other Asia

-4

-29

-88

5%

28%

54%

Southeast Asia

56

24

-27

25%

11%

10%

Other Europe

8

0

-25

6%

0%

16%

China
Japan and Korea
India

Net exporting
regions in 2040

Net exports (bcm)

As a share of production

2014

2025

2040

2014

2025

2040

178

235

307

28%

35%

40%

79

108

168

40%

43%

49%

117

134

145

21%

19%

15%

25

100

136

36%

64%

68%

1

58

127

0%

5%

10%

Sub-Saharan Africa

29

47

79

49%

51%

38%

North Africa

53

64

54

35%

34%

23%

8

7

18

5%

4%

6%

Russia
Caspian
Middle East
Australia
North America

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Net imports (bcm)

Net importing
regions in 2040

South America

Notes: Positive numbers denote net exports and negative numbers denote net imports. Import and export totals should
sum to zero; the difference in 2014 is due to stock changes.
196

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

bcm

Figure 4.18 ⊳ Global gas trade by exporter in the New Policies Scenario
1 200

60%

1 000

50%

800

40%

600

30%

400

20%

200

10%

2010

2014

2020

2025

2030

2035

Other
Australia
Canada
United States
Caspian
Middle East
Africa
Russia
Share of LNG
(right axis)

4

2040

New exporters boost supplier diversity and underpin a gradual increase
in the share of LNG in global gas trade

© OECD/IEA, 2016

The boost in LNG trade is accompanied by a shift in pricing and trade mechanisms. In the
United States, 75 bcm of LNG export capacity – more than half of the liquefaction capacity
under construction globally as of mid-2016 – is set to gradually become operational over
the medium term, bringing total US LNG export capacity to 90 bcm in 2020. Although
LNG exports expand rapidly, reaching around 55 bcm in the early 2020s, the US export
infrastructure clearly does not operate at full capacity. The market share of the United
States in global LNG trade peaks at around 19% in the mid-2030s and then declines
gradually as US unconventional gas production growth loses steam. The main contribution
that US LNG exports make to the international gas trade is flexibility, rather than volume, as
US LNG exports are free from destination clauses (a destination clause restricts the buyer’s
rights to resell an LNG cargo). Moreover, LNG exports extend the influence of the US gas
market on the formation of regional gas prices. Towards the end of the Outlook period, the
cost of liquefying additional gas from the United States and shipping it to Asia or Europe
provides an effective price-ceiling in these regions. Consequently, by 2040, the differentials
between the gas price in Europe or Asia and the price in the United States largely reflect
the cost of bringing US gas to these markets. Gas trade flows also become increasingly
responsive to cost and price differences, with exporters targeting the import markets with
the best netbacks (i.e. the value of the gas in a potential market, less the cost of getting
the gas there).
These developments on the supplier’s side are complemented by initiatives from consumers
to overturn some of the trade paradigms that were established when the LNG trade was
a seller’s market. The slump in gas prices and the growing volumes of uncontracted LNG
have shifted bargaining power to the demand side. Large Asian LNG importers – Japanese
stakeholders at the forefront – have started to seize this opportunity to revisit some of the
Chapter 4 | Natural gas market outlook

197

contract terms that restrict the flexibility of the LNG trade. For instance, Japan’s Ministry
of Economy, Trade and Industry is pursuing a strategy to increase the flexibility of the LNG
market and to establish an LNG trading hub in the country (others, most notably Singapore
and China, are also pushing for gas trading hubs in their countries). Major elements of
Japan’s strategy are a reduction of oil-indexation in gas pricing, the removal of destination
clauses, shorter contract duration and an increase in spot trading. Japan’s Fair Trade
Commission has reportedly launched a preliminary investigation as to whether destination
clauses are anti-competitive. If this gains momentum, other importing countries could
follow suit, giving a boost to the flexibility and liquidity of the LNG trade. Our gas trade
trends and price trajectories allow for significant progress in increasing flexibility, but there
remain numerous contractual, institutional and infrastructure barriers that prevent the gas
market from functioning like any other commodity market (see Chapter 1).
New exporters reshape the global gas market in different phases, starting with Australia
and the United States. These two countries are later joined by Turkmenistan and Canada
ramping up their exports. The advent of Mozambique and Tanzania as major LNG exporters
completes an increasingly diverse image of the global gas trade landscape. Well-established
base suppliers like Russia and the Middle East complement this development by expanding
into new markets. Russian producers unlock the huge Chinese market and make inroads
into the LNG business, while producers in the Middle East substantially expand their stake
in the European market and gain a foothold in South Asia. This rapid increase in the range
of suppliers helps alleviate concerns about security of supply.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Box 4.3 ⊳ How floating storage and regasification unlocks new markets

While floating LNG liquefaction units are only now coming of age, floating storage
and regasification units (FSRUs) have been in operation for about ten years and their
deployment continues to grow rapidly (Figure 4.19). The number of units operating
and under construction currently exceeds 20 worldwide. These floating units are
either purpose-built vessels or converted LNG carriers. They have a number of
advantages over onshore terminals: FSRUs can be built faster and require a lower
upfront capital expenditure than onshore terminals. Lengthy permitting processes
and land acquisition, which can delay the commissioning of onshore terminals, are
usually by-passed through the use of FSRUs. This technology therefore caters well
to emerging gas markets in developing countries, where financing can be a serious
constraint. The scalability of the units also allows the import infrastructure to grow
in lockstep with the distribution network. The main disadvantage of FSRUs is their
relatively small size (typically between 4-8 bcm), which makes them less suited for
countries with a large and steady LNG demand. However, floating terminals are
still an attractive technology for countries that want to increase flexibility (e.g. to
meet seasonal demand swings) or diversify their gas import options. In 2015, Egypt,
Jordan and Pakistan started importing LNG deploying FSRUs while Uruguay and
Colombia will join the club of LNG importers soon by using FSRU. In our Outlook, FSRU

198

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

technology is an important enabler for gas demand growth in various smaller LNG
markets in Africa, Latin America and developing Asia. FSRUs become increasingly
influential in the medium term: their relatively short construction times allow for a
quick ramp-up of LNG imports in times of low gas prices, thus gradually increasing the
price responsiveness of gas consumption.

bcm

Figure 4.19 ⊳ Global regasification capacity by technology

4

1 400

14%

FSRU

1 200

12%

Onshore
terminals

1 000

10%

Share of FSRU
(right axis)

800

8%

600

6%

400

4%

200

2%
2005

2008

2010

2012

2014

2016

2018

Floating storage and regasification terminals grow in significance
Sources: IEA analysis; Cedigaz (2016).

4.3.5 Investment

© OECD/IEA, 2016

The United States and Australia dominate worldwide production growth over the medium
term, but US shale gas production growth is likely to slow considerably and the slump in
investment activity in Australia over the coming years results in subdued output growth in
the period between 2020 and 2025. With the Middle East and China exhibiting relatively
stable growth over the Outlook period, the draw on incremental production from a number
of other suppliers is rising. From the early 2020s onwards, increasing volumes are needed
from a set of countries that actually see their combined output decline over the medium
term, such as Algeria, Indonesia, India, Mexico or Canada (Figure 4.20). In the 2020 to 2025
period, their contribution to incremental global production amounts to over 30%; a share
that increases further to over 50% between 2035 and 2040. The global gas balance thus
increasingly relies on producers and exporters that are either new or need to reverse their
medium-term production trends, suggesting a formidable investment challenge.
Failure to invest and ramp-up production in these countries could arguably be compensated
for by additional gas from Russia – the country holds significant spare production capacity –
yet this would come at the expense of bolstering Russia’s bargaining power over gas prices.
Additional Russian gas exports, primarily to Europe, could free up LNG that would meet gas
Chapter 4 | Natural gas market outlook

199

demand elsewhere. Such a shift in international gas trade, together with a higher supplier
concentration, however, would be associated with upward pressure on global gas prices
and uneasiness about Russian import dependency in Europe.
Figure 4.20 ⊳ Change in gas production by selected region in the
New Policies Scenario

bcm

400

Other
Russia
China
Middle East
United States
and Australia

300
200
100
0
- 100

2014-20

2020-25

2025-30

2030-35

2035-40

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Soon, a rising share of gas production growth will need to come
from countries whose combined output falls in the medium term

The bulk of the projects that are needed to meet global gas demand in the long term are not
economically feasible under current gas price levels. This is one of the factors that push prices
higher in all regions as the gas market rebalances, but it is also a clear indicator that gas producers
need to reduce their costs. With the long list of project slippage, shelving and postponements
in mind, the key question is whether the transition from an over supplied market to a balanced
market can be smooth. Timely investment in upstream projects and infrastructure is critical
to this objective. The challenge also needs to be seen in the context of LNG over capacity
gradually being absorbed over the next ten years – our modelling suggests that inter-regional
gas trade has largely rebalanced by the mid-2020s. To achieve this, and provide for subsequent
demand growth, investment decisions on upstream projects and LNG facilities will have to be
taken much sooner. Some projects with long-lead times, such as greenfield developments may
have to be sanctioned before 2020 while brownfield projects would need to go ahead at the
beginning of the next decade. Moreover, these investment decisions would need to be taken
at a time when the principles of international gas trade are undergoing considerable change:
investors regularly claim that oil-indexation, long-term contracts and other trade rules (e.g.
take-or-pay terms) provide the certainty required for financing capital-intensive upstream and
infrastructure projects. Whether a gas market in flux can deliver timely investments is yet to be
seen and constitutes one of the major uncertainties that accompany our Outlook. Failure to do
so carries the risk that gas could come to be perceived as an unreliable and insecure source of
energy, compromising its long-term interests.
200

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

Figure 4.21 ⊳ Cumulative global gas investment by component and key

region in the New Policies Scenario, 2016-2040 ($2015 billion)
Total investment:
$9.4 trillion

Transmission
and distribution
23%
Liquefaction
and
regasiﬁcation
9%

Upstream
conventional
47%

Upstream
unconventional
21%

United States
and Australia
21%
Other
52%

4

Middle East
9%
China
8%
Russia
10%

Global gas supply investment over the Outlook period
shows a high proportion of infrastructure investment
Note: Investment values for upstream natural gas require making assumptions about the capital cost of associated gas
relative to non-associated gas, as well as how investments for natural gas liquids are shared between oil and natural gas.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Some $9.4 trillion of investment is needed in global gas supply over the Outlook period. The
regional distribution of capital expenditure by-and-large reflects the trends in production
growth, with more than half of the cumulative investment needed over the period in those
countries that lead gas production growth after 2025 (Figure 4.21). The large upstream
capital expenditure cuts that many oil and gas companies have implemented in 2015 and
2016 would need to be reversed, at least in part, in order to meet the supply requirements
of the New Policies Scenario.

Chapter 4 | Natural gas market outlook

201

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Chapter 5
Coal market outlook
A rock in a hard place?

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Highlights

•

Global coal demand fell in 2015 for the first time since the late 1990s. In the New
Policies Scenario the world’s coal use grows by 0.2% per year in the period to 2040
– a stark contrast to the annual decline of 2.6% in the 450 Scenario, which outlines
a deeper decarbonisation. Spurred by climate policies, high-income economies like
the European Union or the United States slash coal demand by over 60% and 40%
respectively in the New Policies Scenario. In India and Southeast Asia, excluding a
low-cost fuel from their options to meet surging energy demand is a much less easy
choice to make; these countries become the drivers of future coal demand growth.

•

Measures to combat air pollution, to shift away from heavy industries and to
diversify the power mix are re-shaping China’s coal use. Our central scenario implies
that coal demand in China, accounting for half the world’s coal use, peaked in 2013
and is set to fall a further 13% to 2040. Coal’s share in China’s energy mix drops
from two-thirds in 2014 to 45% in 2040. Industry leads the decline, with coal use
dropping by nearly a quarter through 2040. Coal use in the Chinese power sector
peaks around 2030 and ends up 5% lower than in 2014.

•

The share of global steel produced in coal-intensive basic oxygen furnaces drops
from 75% in 2014 to just over half in 2040, underpinning a 15% decline in coking
coal use in that period. The global trend is mainly caused by a steep drop in China’s
coking coal demand and production as demand in other major steel producing
countries continues to grow (e.g. India or Brazil). As these countries mainly rely on
imports, coking coal trade grows by 0.4% per year, despite demand having peaked.

•

Low prices – the result of over-capacity – have taken a toll on the profitability of
the industry: companies producing nearly half of the US coal are currently under
bankruptcy protection, while 80% of coal firms in China incurred losses in 2015.
China successfully embarked on a 1 billion tonne capacity reduction, which has put
upward pressure on coal prices in recent months. The New Policies Scenario sees
the market rebalance by the early 2020s, accompanied by a continued rebound of
coal prices. Australia remains the largest coal exporter, followed by Indonesia.

•

Chinese imports are volatile over the medium term, but the long-term fundamentals
point to a drop in imports of 85% over the Outlook period, resulting in a slump in
global coal trade until the late 2020s. By then, robust import growth in India and
Southeast Asia lifts trade volumes above current levels. However, Indian policymakers are firm in expressing their intention to reduce coal imports and China’s net
trade position is sensitive to the vicissitudes of its domestic market, which could
make China again a net exporter of coal. Either of these key uncertainties has the
potential to leave the global coal market over-supplied for much longer.

Chapter 5 | Coal market outlook

203

5.1 Recent market and policy developments
The first decade of this century looked like the return of King Coal. Global coal demand
growth – primarily underpinned by China and India – averaged 4.7% per year between
2000 and 2010 (in comparison, oil demand grew by 1.2% and natural gas demand by 2.8%
over the same period). Coal’s share in global primary energy use grew from 23% in 2000 to
28% in 2010 and stands at 29% today. Coal use in the power sector grew strongly and, with
a 41% share of global electricity generation, coal is the backbone of many power systems
around the world today. But the boom is over: global coal demand declined in 2015 for the
first time since the late 1990s.
Coal demand in China stalled in 2014 and is estimated to have dropped by some 3% in
2015 as a result of China’s transition: having established the largest heavy industry in the
world, China now prioritises the expansion of its services sector. The transformation is well
underway, with crude steel and cement production in China having peaked in 2014. In the
United States, low natural gas prices have spurred a surge in gas-fired power generation
at the expense of coal: for the first time in history, the United States generated as much
power from gas as from coal in 2015.
After four consecutive years of falling prices, a rebalancing process is emerging with prices
increasing since early 2016, mainly as a result of capacity cuts in China, but the prolonged
price slump has left deep scars on the coal industry. Some 80% of China’s coal producers
incurred losses in 2015. The situation has not been much better in the United States where,
over the last three years, nearly fifty coal firms – accounting for half of the country’s coal
output – have filed for bankruptcy protection. Though recent price increases hold promise
of slightly better times, the profitability of the coal industry in various countries is yet to be
re-established. Reducing excess capacity is still a key challenge for Chinese, American and
some export-oriented coal producers.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Future prospects, though improving, are not rosy. The 21st Conference of the Parties (COP21)
that took place in December 2015 concluded with an agreement that the increase in global
temperatures should be limited to well below 2 °C in 2100. In preparation for COP21, more
than 180 countries submitted pledges on how they intend to reduce or limit their greenhousegas emissions. While the degree of ambition varies between countries and implementation is
yet to progress, only abated coal is compatible with the long-term commitment.
In light of recent market and policy developments it is unclear whether coal supply and
demand will make a major comeback, level off or enter terminal long-term decline. From a
demand-side perspective, the key uncertainty lies with the determination of governments
to rigorously implement climate and environmental policies. In this context, coal’s future
in the global energy mix may be increasingly tied to the technical and economic feasibility
of carbon capture and storage (CCS) as well as its public acceptance. From a supply-side
perspective the key question is how and when supply and demand might be brought back
into balance, establishing a price level that sustainably restores the profitability of the coal
industry and one that is sufficient to stimulate the necessary investments in the long run.
204

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

5.2 Trends to 2040 by scenario
5.2.1 Medium-term dynamics
The coming five years see further capacity cuts – politically administered, market-driven
or as a result of depletion – but in light of stagnating demand, these are expected
to be inadequate to fully absorb the over-capacity in the market. The medium-term
outlook (i.e. the period to the end of the decade) is thus characterised by a sustained
disequilibrium between coal supply and demand. Nevertheless, the medium-term policy
and market dynamics are setting the course for the long-term trends with mining capacity
reduction continuing to show effects by the early 2020s, paralleled by a further increase in
international coal prices by some 10-15% over the 2015 average prices.
By 2020, global coal demand is projected to have rebounded to 2014 levels. This is a result
of growth in India and Southeast Asia, which more than offsets declining coal demand in
the European Union, the United States and China. International steam coal trade declined
in 2014 and 2015. With Chinese imports decreasing and Indian imports tapering off, the
next few years see a further decline in the volume of internationally traded steam coal.
Although global coking coal demand has peaked, according to our Outlook, coking coal
trade exhibits robust growth. This comes as the decline in demand – primarily in China
– hits domestic production of coking coal harder than trade. Moreover, other large steel
producing countries, like India and Brazil, have growing import requirements.
Investment activity remains sluggish over the next few years. The main exception is India
where large new mines are being opened and substantial amounts of capital are being
spent to expand coal-related infrastructure. Elsewhere, capital expenditure is likely to be
concentrated on sustaining production in existing operations, with only a few, low unit
cost expansion projects receiving a final investment decision. Outside India, new greenfield
projects are unlikely to be initiated over the medium term, but considerable sums are spent
on projects that are underway and too advanced to abandon.

5.2.2 Long-term scenarios

© OECD/IEA, 2016

The New Policies Scenario, the central scenario in this World Energy Outlook (WEO),
incorporates all policies and measures that are in place today, while taking into account,
in full or in part, the aims, targets and intentions that have been announced, even if these
are not fully implemented. Announced policy measures are diverse – they range from
fostering energy efficiency, combatting air pollution, alleviating energy poverty, supporting
low-carbon fuels to placing a price on carbon-dioxide (CO2) emissions – and they all have
wide-ranging implications for future coal markets.
In the New Policies Scenario, the policy, macroeconomic and demographic assumptions lead
to coal consumption growth of 0.2% per year between 2014 and 2040, a stark deceleration
compared to the annual growth rate of 2.4% observed over the past 25 years. This trend
reflects, in particular, the falling cost of renewable energy resources and the climate pledges
(Nationally Determined Contributions) that countries tabled at COP21. Our projections in
Chapter 5 | Coal market outlook

205

5

this scenario suggest that the economic and policy headwinds facing coal are not strong
enough, for the moment, to send global coal demand into actual decline, but the share of
coal in global primary energy supply nevertheless falls markedly from 29% in 2014 to 23% in
2040 (Figure 5.1). Coal, currently only topped by oil in terms of its share in primary energy
supply, falls to third after being overtaken by natural gas in the late 2030s. Growth in demand
and depletion of coal deposits together mean capital expenditure of $1.1 trillion is needed in
mines and supply infrastructure over the Outlook period.
Figure 5.1 ⊳ Global coal demand and share of coal in world primary energy
Current Policies
Scenario (CPS)

7 000
6 000

New Policies
Scenario (NPS)

5 000

100%

75%

50%

4 000

1990

2000

2010

2020

2030

2040

2014

13%

23%

27%

2 000
1980

450 Scenario (450)

29%

25%

3 000

Coal | Oil | Gas | Nuclear | Renewables

8 000

Share in primary energy

Global coal demand (Mtce)

demand by scenario

CPS NPS 450
2040

Coal use and coal’s share in primary energy is sensitive to the level of climate action
Notes: Mtce = million tonnes of coal equivalent.1

© OECD/IEA, 2016

The Current Policies Scenario which assumes no new measures beyond those adopted today,
sees coal demand expanding at a faster rate of 1.2% per year to 2040 (when coal demand
is 30% higher than in the New Policies Scenario). This is a world without the impetus of
many of the policy changes implied by the pledges made at COP21. Coal’s share in primary
energy demand drops only slightly, to 27% in 2040, with coal remaining the second-largest
provider of primary energy after oil. Decarbonisation of the electricity system moves at
a slower pace in this scenario, with coal retaining its leading position as fuel for power
generation in 2040: 36% of the world’s electricity is generated from coal in this scenario,
well ahead of renewables (29%) or gas (24%). However, the Current Policies Scenario shares
with the New Policies Scenario the feature that growth in coal use is concentrated in Asian
developing countries. Decarbonisation efforts are already deeply engrained in many highincome countries’ energy policies, leading to a fall in coal demand in all major OECD coalconsuming countries such as the European Union, the United States and Japan. Cumulative
1. A tonne of coal equivalent equals 7 million kilocalories (kcal) or 0.7 tonnes of oil equivalent. In practice, traded coal
rarely reaches such high energy content, but typically falls into a range of 4.5 million kcal to 6.5 million kcal per tonne.
206

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

investments into coal supply in this scenario amount to $1.5 trillion, 30% higher than
in the New Policies Scenario. Supported by relatively robust demand growth and OECD
steam coal import prices (including handling fees at the import port and inland delivery
cost) rising to $100/tonne in 2040, the Current Policies Scenario provides the conditions in
which coal mining can profitably expand into untapped or under-developed deposits that
require capital-intensive infrastructure.
Table 5.1 ⊳ World coal demand, production and trade by scenario (Mtce)
New Policies

Demand
Power generation
Industrial use2

Current Policies

450 Scenario

2000

2014

2025

2040

2025

2040

2025

2040

3 308

5 609

5 650

5 915

6 229

7 610

4 535

2 858

2 236

3 440

3 373

3 527

3 871

4 964

2 411

986

857

1 781

1 891

2 082

1 956

2 297

1 770

1 643

Other sectors

216

388

386

306

402

349

353

229

Power generation share

68%

61%

60%

60%

62%

65%

53%

35%

Production

3 254

5 680

5 650

5 915

6 229

7 610

4 535

2 858

Steam coal

2 504

4 374

4 392

4 812

4 905

6 356

3 440

2 100

Coking coal

449

1 016

979

861

1 006

929

901

639

Lignite*

301

290

279

242

318

325

195

119

Steam coal share

77%

77%

78%

81%

79%

84%

76%

73%

471

1 083

1 062

1 120

1 228

1 514

844

537

Steam coal

310

801

767

824

917

1 190

580

320

Coking coal

175

284

306

311

323

340

275

229

Production which is traded

14%

19%

19%

19%

20%

20%

19%

19%

Trade**

* Includes peat. ** Total net exports for all WEO regions, not including intra-regional trade.
Notes: Historical data for world demand differ from world production due to stock changes. Trade does not match the
sum of steam and coking coal as a region could be a net exporter of one coal type but a net importer of another.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

The 450 Scenario sets out an energy pathway consistent with a 50% chance of limiting the
global increase in temperature to 2 °C, an objective incompatible with unabated coal use. In
this scenario, global coal demand drops sharply, at a rate of 2.6% per year. By 2040, world
coal consumption is only half that in the New Policies Scenario and coal’s share in primary
energy supply has dropped to 13%. In power generation, coal’s share drops to 7% in 2040, far
behind renewables (58%), nuclear (18%) and gas (16%). By then, 70% of the electricity still
generated from coal comes from power plants equipped with CCS (Box 5.1). The drop in steam
coal use, primarily in power generation, is much larger than that in coking coal. This is because
alternatives to coal use for power generation are widely available, unlike in the steel industry.
Nonetheless, by the end of the Outlook period, coking coal consumption is a quarter lower than

2. Unless otherwise stated, coal use in industry in this chapter reflects volumes also consumed in own use and
transformation in blast furnaces and coke ovens, petrochemical feedstocks, coal-to-liquids and coal-to-gas plants.

Chapter 5 | Coal market outlook

207

5

in the New Policies Scenario. This has important implications for trade: the volume of steam
coal trade plummets to 40% of the current level while coking coal trade drops to 80% of the
current trade volume. This means that exporters of high quality coking coal, such as Australia,
Russia and Canada can sustain a considerable level of export-oriented mining activity, even
in the 450 Scenario. The share of global steam coal production that is traded internationally
drops, from 18% in 2014 to 15% in 2040. The main reason behind this trend is that by 2040
the majority of the coal used in the power sector is combusted in plants with CCS, which is
often best suited to integrated operations that focus on the least-cost deposits near the power
stations. The de-globalisation of the steam coal market hits exporters across the board, but
those with low production costs and proximity to key importers in developing Asia, are slightly
better off than exporters that have large market shares in the Atlantic basin. India, where CCS
makes limited inroads in the 450 Scenario, also tends to focus on the exploitation of domestic
deposits, meaning that steam coal imports peak around 2030; but the subsequent import decline
is less steep than, for example, in China or Japan. In the 450 Scenario, cumulative investments
are, unsurprisingly, the lowest in the three WEO scenarios. Nevertheless, cumulatively some
$730 billion of investments still go into the global supply coal supply chain over the projection
period to sustain production in existing mines and to compensate for depletion. Investment
is focussed on small incremental projects in well-established mining regions, as the scenario
leaves no scope for the development of large greenfield projects in remote basins.
Box 5.1 ⊳ The role of CCS in the 450 Scenario

© OECD/IEA, 2016

The 450 Scenario in WEO-2016 relies considerably less than in the past on the deployment
of carbon capture and storage, given the slow pace at which CCS projects are being
demonstrated and tested. This should not be misinterpreted as a recommendation
to reduce spending on CCS research and development. Indeed, the delays in CCS
development highlight the need for intensification of the effort to establish the
technology’s marketability. This is also essential if biomass-based CCS is to be deployed
as a means to achieve negative emissions in the latter half of this century in a “well
below 2 degrees” scenario (see Chapter 8).

Despite the downward revision, CCS still has an important role to play in the 450 Scenario.
In 2040, globally some 430 gigawatts (GW) of power plant are equipped with CCS in
this scenario, 60% of which are coal-fired. By 2040, power plants equipped with CCS
generate nearly 10% of the world’s electricity. Around 75% of the coal-fired power plants
using CCS are located in China. This highlights the key role that China is expected to take
in advancing the technology in order to decarbonise its energy mix and to protect the
value of its power generation assets and coal reserves. China is one of the ten countries
that mentioned CCS in its Nationally Determined Contribution, stressing the need to
strengthen research and development. The retrofitting of coal plants plays a critical role
in China’s CCS strategy, as more than 300 GW of Chinese coal plants meet a number
of basic criteria for retrofit (IEA, 2016a). The key criterion is access to CO2 storage, but
efficiency, plant size and age are also important parameters for retrofit suitability.

208

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

How to effect the transition from over-supply and losses to a financially sound industry
that is able to make the necessary new investments is not an easy matter and a common
challenge in all our scenarios, whatever level of coal production is predicated. To bring
supply and demand back into balance requires a combination of the following factors and
conditions (which are all discussed in greater depth in relation to the New Policies Scenario,
later in this chapter):


Market forces stimulating industry consolidation, restructuring and shedding of
unprofitable production capacity.



State interventions to cut coal production capacity in countries with insufficient price
responsiveness of supply.



Supported by the first two factors, a rebound in coal prices in the first half of the
projection period.

In all our scenarios, the coal market is projected to be broadly in balance by the early
2020s. Scenario-specific policy measures and energy demand fundamentals play an
important role in determining how this might play out in practice: the 450 Scenario, which
shows a sharp decline in demand, relies to a much larger degree on capacity reductions
in order to balance the market – obviously, any rigidities that impede capacity from being
cut have the potential to significantly prolong the current imbalance. Conversely, strong
demand growth as suggested by the Current Policies Scenario reduces the reliance on
timely capacity decommissioning as demand growth absorbs some of the over-capacity.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Coal prices face different fortunes in the three scenarios. Both production costs and
consumption levels are scenario dependent and with higher consumption, more costly
mines are needed to establish a balance between supply and demand, pushing coal prices
up and vice versa. The three coal price trajectories broadly follow two phases, a continued
rebound in the period to the early 2020s and a long-term evolution that reflects the
fundamentals of the respective scenario (Figure 5.2). The rebound in prices is a result of
the capacity adjustment process which restores profitability of some of the mines that are
currently incurring losses. The price increase over the medium term is more modest in the
450 Scenario, compared to the other two scenarios, as the decline in demand requires an
acceleration of mine closures, reducing the call on loss-making mines. The gradual increase
in coal prices in the latter half of the period, in the New Policies Scenario and the Current
Policies Scenario, reflects worsening geological conditions (primarily affecting mature mining
regions), the need to tap remote deposits and increasing input costs (wages, fuel, steel and
explosives), due in part to increasing oil prices. In the 450 Scenario, a concentration on the
least-cost mines in combination with productivity gains which outweigh cost increases,
results in a moderate long-term decline in coal prices. By 2040, the average OECD steam
coal import price rises to $100/tonne in the Current Policies Scenario and about $90/tonne
in the New Policies Scenario, but falls to under $60/tonne in the 450 Scenario.3
3. Unless otherwise stated, values in dollars per tonne are in real terms and adjusted to an energy content of
6 000 kcal/kg (net as received).

Chapter 5 | Coal market outlook

209

5

Figure 5.2 ⊳ Average OECD steam coal import price and global coal trade
OECD steam coal import price

140

Mtce

Dollars per tonne
(2015, adjusted to 6 000 kcal/kg)

by scenario

120

Current Policies
Scenario (CPS)

100
80

New Policies
Scenario (NPS)

Coal trade
2025-40
2014-25

1 200

2014

800
400
0

60

450 Scenario (450)

- 400

40
20
1990

1 600

- 800
2000

2010

2020

2030

2040

CPS NPS 450

Coal prices rebound in the period to the early 2020s as the market rebalances

5.3 A closer look at the New Policies Scenario
5.3.1 Demand

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Growth in global coal consumption is sluggish in the New Policies Scenario, demand reaching
5 915 million tonnes of coal equivalent (Mtce) in 2040, only some 300 Mtce higher than
today (Table 5.2). Coal increasingly struggles in a post-COP21 era, with public opposition
to coal-fired power plant developments (and mines) on the rise around the world. The
average growth rate in demand of 0.2% per year over the period falls behind the rates of
growth seen for oil and gas demand, which are 0.4% and 1.5% per year respectively.
In the past 25 years, coal demand growth has been closely aligned with economic growth, a
relationship that is set to be broken over the coming 25 years (Figure 5.3). The outlook for
coal demand in high-income countries, such as in the European Union, the United States
or Japan, is already almost completely detached from the overall economic outlook in
these countries. By contrast, strong growth in incomes and energy needs in South Asia,
Southeast Asia and sub-Saharan Africa continues to propel their coal demand higher (with
a big contribution coming from steel and cement production, two heavily coal-reliant
industries). China’s position moves progressively to that of the higher income countries,
exerting a strong influence on the global decoupling of coal demand from economic growth.
China’s economic rebalancing results in a decline of China’s coal use over the projection
period. With global coal demand growth levelling off, growth in CO2 emissions from coal
combustion stagnates over the Outlook period.

210

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

Table 5.2 ⊳ Coal demand by region in the New Policies Scenario (Mtce)
OECD
Americas
United States
Europe
Asia Oceania
Japan
Non-OECD
E. Europe/Eurasia
Russia
Asia
China
India
Southeast Asia
Middle East
Africa
South Africa
Latin America
Brazil
World
European Union

2000

2014

2020

2025

2030

2035

2040

1 572
822
762
481
269
139
1 736
299
171
1 282
955
208
45
2
128
117
25
19
3 308
459

1 447
672
617
427
347
169
4 162
296
148
3 664
2 896
540
142
4
160
146
37
25
5 609
383

1 256
556
510
364
335
158
4 324
295
150
3 821
2 831
686
201
6
162
137
39
24
5 580
319

1 135
506
463
322
306
145
4 516
292
152
4 000
2 807
820
257
8
174
134
42
24
5 650
277

1 017
463
429
266
288
138
4 753
296
158
4 216
2 786
985
313
8
186
127
47
25
5 771
217

908
422
394
217
268
129
4 950
301
161
4 379
2 698
1 162
371
9
210
121
52
25
5 858
168

839
396
370
195
248
119
5 075
307
162
4 458
2 521
1 338
430
9
245
117
57
25
5 915
142

2014-2040

Change
- 607
- 276
- 246
- 232
- 99
- 51
913
10
14
794
- 374
798
288
5
84
- 28
20
0
306
- 241

CAAGR*
-2.1%
-2.0%
-1.9%
-3.0%
-1.3%
-1.4%
0.8%
0.1%
0.3%
0.8%
-0.5%
3.6%
4.4%
3.0%
1.6%
-0.8%
1.7%
0.0%
0.2%
-3.7%

5

* Compound average annual growth rate.

Figure 5.3 ⊳ Growth of global GDP, coal demand and CO2 emissions from
Index (2014 = 100)

coal use in the New Policies Scenario

250
GDP

200
150

Coal demand
100

CO2 emissions
from coal use

50

© OECD/IEA, 2016

1990

2000

2010

2020

2030

2040

Global coal demand decouples from global GDP, largely due to changes in China
Note: The divergence in growth rates for coal demand and CO2 emissions from coal use over the period stems from
efficiency gains and the uptake of CCS.

Chapter 5 | Coal market outlook

211

Regional trends in demand
As noted, income and stage of economic development are critical determinants of the
stance taken on coal in national energy and climate policies. Although competition from
gas and renewables is an increasingly important consideration for coal markets, it is more
than ever environmental policies that determine the evolution of regional coal demand.
Higher income countries tend to have stagnant or slowly-growing coal demand, and can
afford to back out coal use. Lower income countries, with fast growing consumption (and,
often, large endowments of coal) need to mobilise all potential sources of energy and
cannot, for now, afford to forego a relatively low-cost option – even as they pursue others
in parallel. This results in a dichotomy of regional demand trends that is unmatched in oil
and gas markets and shapes our Outlook for the future of coal markets, with far-reaching
implications for coal trade.
Figure 5.4 ⊳ Change in coal demand by key region in the
New Policies Scenario

Mtce

800
600
400
200
0
- 200
- 400

China

United
States

European
Union

Japan and
Korea

Africa

Southeast
Asia

India

© OECD/IEA, 2016

There are sharp regional contrasts in the way that coal demand changes to 2040

The climate pledges and energy policies brought forward by the European Union, the United
States and China – together accounting for 70% of global coal demand – involve a significant
reduction in greenhouse-gas (GHG) emissions and strong growth in the deployment of lowcarbon technologies for power generation. This policy push fosters a drop in coal demand
by 2040 of around 60% in the European Union, 40% in the United States and 15% in China
(Figure 5.4). These declines, however, are more than offset by increasing coal demand in
other parts of the world, particularly in South Asia, Southeast Asia and Africa. Coal demand
in India grows by two-and-a-half times in the period to 2040 and that of Southeast Asia
triples. Though many developing countries (including India) proposed at COP21 to increase
the share of non-fossil fuels in their respective energy mixes, their coal demand, in absolute
terms, grows. Overall, in the New Policies Scenario, coal remains a key pillar in the energy
mix of many developing countries, and an integral part of their strategies for economic
212

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

development and alleviation of energy poverty (1.2 billion people worldwide currently
do not have access to electricity). Continued reliance on coal in these countries is often
motivated by its abundance and relatively low cost. Other important considerations are
the large diversity of coal exporters which minimises potential energy security concerns,
and the value of jobs in the coal supply chain. Power generation from coal requires less
infrastructure than gas, is technically less sophisticated than nuclear power or variable
renewables and has shorter construction times and lower capital investment than, for
instance, large hydro plants. Heavy industrial sectors – especially steel-making and cement
production – which are robust drivers of coal demand, are typically dominant in the earlier
stages of a country’s economic development, as they underpin construction activity e.g. for
housing and infrastructure.

Sectoral trends in demand
Two sectors, power and industry, are the main coal consumers and the primary sources of
growth. Some 60% of the global coal demand comes from the power sector, to generate
electricity and heat, a share that stays flat over the period to 2040. The power sector
was the main engine for global coal demand growth over the past 25 years but going
forward, coal demand growth in the power sector is more subdued than in the industry
sector (as there is a wide range of decarbonisation technologies readily available in the
power sector). Industrial coal demand constitutes one-third of total coal use today, which
increases to 35% in 2040. Coal consumption in the buildings, agriculture and transport
sectors diminishes over the period.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Coal demand for power generation increases by 90 Mtce in the period to 2040 and coalfired generation reaches 10 785 terawatt-hours (TWh) in 2040, up from around 9 700 TWh
in 2014; but the share of coal in power generation plummets from 41% in 2014 to 28%
in 2040. Coal loses its rank as the number one fuel for power generation to renewables
around 2030. Efficiency improvements in the global coal fleet also curb fuel-burn for power
generation. The efficiency of the global coal fleet improves by over three percentage points
over the period, reaching 44% in 2040. The efficiency gains are underpinned by a shift
in boiler technology: today around 70% of the fleet use subcritical technology, a share
that drops to 45% in 2040. The New Policies Scenario projects around 400 GW of new
supercritical and 330 GW of new ultra-supercritical plant to be built over the next 25 years.
As a consequence, the share of power sector coal demand coming from subcritical plants
drops from around 70% today to 30% in 2040 (Figure 5.5).
Among the industrial sectors, the iron and steel industry is by far the largest coal consumer,
accounting for half of industrial coal consumption in 2014. However, the weight of the
iron and steel industry in industrial coal use declines over the Outlook period as its share
drops to around 40% in 2040, even though global steel production expands by 20% over
the same period, reaching nearly 2 000 million tonnes in 2040. The main reason is that the
share of steel produced in basic oxygen furnaces (the production route that is preceded
by coal-based blast furnaces) drops from three-quarters in 2014 to just over half in 2040,
as steel production in electric arc furnaces – spurred by the growing availability of scrap –
Chapter 5 | Coal market outlook

213

5

ramps up quickly. This fall in steel production from basic oxygen furnaces, in combination
with efficiency improvements, results in a decline of some 80 Mtce in coal use in the
iron and steel industry over the period (Figure 5.5). This implies that global coking coal
demand peaked in 2015 and declines by 15% over the period, falling to 860 Mtce in 2040.
Increasing consumption of steam coal in steel production (used for instance as pulverisedcoal-injection) also puts further downward pressure on coking coal use.
Figure 5.5 ⊳ Global coal demand by key sector in the New Policies Scenario
(a) Power

600

1 200

1 800

2 400

3 000

Mtce
3 600

2014
2040
Subcritical

Supercritical

Ultra-supercritical

IGCC and CCS

CHP and heat

(b) Industry
300

600

900

1 200

1 500

1 800

Mtce
2 100

2014
2040
Iron and steel

Cement

Chemicals

Other

Plant technology changes the power sector’s demand structure,
while chemicals are the primary growth engine for coal demand in industry
Notes: IGCC = integrated gasification combined-cycle; CCS = carbon capture and storage; CHP = combined heat and
power.

Coal consumption in the chemical industry grows by two-and-a-half times over the Outlook
period, reaching nearly 530 Mtce in 2040. Some 70% of the growth stems from coal-toliquids and coal-to-gas transformation (mostly in China), both of which see strong growth
rates as oil and natural gas prices increase faster than coal prices over the projection
period. Yet, ammonia and urea production from coal also result in some growth in coal
demand from the chemical industry. Much of the global growth in coal demand from non
energy-intensive industries (e.g. textiles, food and beverage and machinery) arises in India
where strong economic growth pushes up coal demand in all industrial sectors.

5.3.2 Supply
© OECD/IEA, 2016

Reserves and resources
Coal deposits are abundant and geographically dispersed (Table 5.3). All major regions hold
a significant share of the 985 billion tonnes of proven reserves (coal that is known to exist
and thought to be economically exploitable with today’s technology), a distribution that
214

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

helps to explain the relative absence of energy security concerns about coal supply. This
reserves number is up by 2% from the figure in WEO-2015, mainly as a result of slight
upward revisions in Turkey, China, India and Indonesia (BGR, 2015). Reserves are often also
a reflection of how advanced exploration is in a country or region; the United States, for
instance, holds a quarter of the global proven coal reserves whereas Africa holds just over
1%. Significant reserves are also in Russia (16%), China (13%), Australia (11%), India (9%)
and the European Union (7%). Resources, which include deposits that are not necessarily
exploitable at current prices or with current technology, are more than 20-times larger
than reserves.
Table 5.3 ⊳ Remaining recoverable coal resources, end-2014 (billion tonnes)
Coking
coal

Steam
coal

Lignite

OECD

1 676

7 303

2 317

11 297

49%

459

47%

227

Americas

1 036

5 842

1 519

8 396

37%

262

27%

264

Total
Share of Proven Share of
resources* world reserves world

R/P
ratio**

Europe

155

330

343

827

4%

83

8%

154

Asia Oceania

485

1 132

456

2 073

9%

115

12%

232

Non-OECD

1 732

7 550

2 387

11 669

51%

525

53%

92

E. Europe/Eurasia

757

2 254

1 441

4 452

19%

238

24%

390

Asia

920

4 984

920

6 824

30%

260

26%

55

Middle East

19

23

-

41

0%

1

0%

1 256

Africa

34

263

0

297

1%

13

1%

48

3

27

25

55

0%

13

1%

131

3 408

14 853

4 705

22 966

100%

985

100%

127

Latin America
World***

* The breakdown of coal resources by type is an IEA estimate and proven reserves are a subset of resources. ** The
reserves to production ratio (R/P) represents the length of time that proven reserves would last if production was to
continue at current rates. *** Excludes Antarctica.
Sources: IEA analysis; BGR (2015).

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Production
Global coal production grows from around 5 700 Mtce in 2014 to 5 915 Mtce in 2040,
an annual average rate of 0.2% (Table 5.4). Currently, some 60% of the world’s hard coal
production comes from underground mines, with the remainder from surface mines. China
is the largest coal producer in the world, a ranking that it keeps throughout the projection
period. India, currently the fifth-largest producer in energy terms (India is third largest in
terms of mass), overtakes the United States to become the second-largest producer in the
early 2020s. Steam coal production amounts to 77% of the world’s coal output today. This
share increases to 81% in 2040, as coking coal production drops from 1 015 Mtce in 2014
to some 860 Mtce. Today, around 55% of global coking coal production occurs in China,
but due to the rapid decline of coke-based steel production in China, its share in coking

Chapter 5 | Coal market outlook

215

5

coal production drops to 40% in 2040. Australia is the second-largest coking coal producer,
accounting for 17% of global production today and increasing its share to over a quarter
in 2040. Lignite – primarily produced in the European Union, Russia, the United States
and Australia – accounts for 5% of global coal production. Due to its high carbon intensity,
demand for lignite and, hence, its production, declines over the period and accounts for
4% of global coal production in 2040. Following the pattern on the demand side, there are
stark regional differences in coal production. By far the largest contribution to global coal
production growth comes from India, followed by Indonesia and Australia. Coal production
drops amply in the United States, China and the European Union.
Table 5.4 ⊳ Coal production by region in the New Policies Scenario (Mtce)
OECD
Americas
United States

2014-2040

2000

2014

2020

2025

2030

2035

2040

1 381

1 395

1 205

1 116

1 055

986

959

- 436

-1.4%

825

757

611

555

515

464

428

- 329

-2.2%

Change

CAAGR*

767

693

561

506

469

425

389

- 303

-2.2%

Europe

311

225

168

132

95

71

62

- 164

-4.9%

Asia Oceania

245

412

427

429

445

450

469

57

0.5%

235

408

424

427

443

448

467

59

0.5%

1 873

4 286

4 374

4 535

4 715

4 872

4 956

670

0.6%

319

423

416

422

430

431

431

7

0.1%
0.2%

Australia
Non-OECD
E. Europe/Eurasia
Russia

184

271

274

275

282

285

284

13

1 318

3 549

3 647

3 797

3 954

4 097

4 149

600

0.6%

China

1 019

2 699

2 669

2 681

2 683

2 638

2 487

- 212

-0.3%

India

187

362

485

576

682

829

997

635

4.0%

65

389

395

437

480

517

551

162

1.4%
1.0%

Asia

Indonesia
Middle East

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

0

187

224

227

233

248

261

293

69

1.0%

South Africa

181

211

207

202

201

194

194

- 17

-0.3%

Latin America

48

88

84

82

82

82

82

-6

-0.3%

36

82

80

78

78

78

78

-5

-0.2%

3 254

5 680

5 580

5 650

5 771

5 858

5 915

234

0.2%

307

214

156

120

81

57

47

- 167

-5.6%

Africa

Colombia
World
European Union

* Compound average annual growth rate.
Note: Historical data for the world can differ from demand in Table 5.2, due to stock changes.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Trade4
In the New Policies Scenario coal trade remains in a trough over the medium term before
rebounding in the early 2020s and then gradually rising to 1 120 Mtce in 2040, some 40 Mtce
above the level in 2014 (Figure 5.6). The global trend is the result of declining demand for
4. Unless otherwise stated, trade figures in this chapter reflect volumes traded between the countries/regions modelled
in the WEO, and therefore do not include intra-regional trade.
216

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

imports in major importing regions – among them a 185 Mtce drop in Chinese imports – in the
first-half of the projection period before strong import growth from India and various other
developing countries becomes dominant in the latter half of the projection period. The share
of international trade in global coal demand remains flat, at just under a fifth through 2040
(Table 5.5). Having become the largest coal importer in 2015, India maintains this position
over the period, with shipments increasing by 90% to 340 Mtce in 2040. As imports in China
are estimated to have dropped by a quarter in 2015, it falls slightly behind Japan as the thirdlargest coal importer. Imports in China are volatile over the next few years but continue their
declining trend, dropping to around 35 Mtce in 2040. Nevertheless, China’s southern coastal
region remains pivotal for international coal pricing for a long time, as consumers in the
region can arbitrage easily between domestic and international coal supply. With India’s rise
as a dominant force in international coal trade, India’s west coast is set to emerge as a new
arbitrage point and price marker similar to the role of China’s coastline today.

Mtce

Figure 5.6 ⊳ Global coal trade by exporter in the New Policies Scenario
1 200

Other
Colombia
South Africa
Russia
Indonesia
Australia

1 000
800
600
400
200

1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2014 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Global coal trade rebounds to 2014 levels only in the late 2020s, after a long slump

Steam coal dominates international coal trade, accounting for some three-quarters of the
shipments, with the remainder taken up by coking coal. Steam coal and coking coal trade
follow different patterns. Steam coal trade more closely follows the global demand trend,
i.e. a decline over the medium term, with a rebound in the longer term. Two key steam
coal importers – China and India – gradually decrease their import dependency over the
projection period, resulting in an annual average growth rate of steam coal trade of 0.1%,
considerably behind the rise of 0.4% per year observed in global steam coal demand. In
contrast, coking coal trade expands by 0.4% per year despite global coking demand having
peaked and declining by 0.6% annually. Much of the reason for coking coal trade growing
while global coking coal demand falls relates to coking coal’s relative scarcity, which favours
trade. Outside China (which produces most of its coking coal needs domestically), coking
Chapter 5 | Coal market outlook

217

5

coal demand increases by around 100 Mtce through to 2040. The bulk of the additional
demand comes from countries that have limited endowments of coal suitable for steel
production, such as India, Brazil, Southeast Asia and parts of Africa. This benefits exporters
that hold large deposits of coking coal, like Australia, Russia, Canada and, increasingly,
Mozambique. By 2040, 36% of the coking coal used worldwide in steel production is traded
internationally, up from 29% in 2014.
Table 5.5 ⊳ Coal trade by region in the New Policies Scenario
2014

Trade
(Mtce)
OECD
Americas
United States

2040

2025

Share of
demand*

Trade
(Mtce)

Share of
demand*

Trade
(Mtce)

Share of
demand*

2014-2040
Change
(Mtce)

- 63

4%

- 19

2%

119

12%

182

80

11%

49

9%

32

7%

- 48

73

10%

43

9%

19

5%

- 54

- 208

49%

- 190

59%

- 133

68%

- 75

Asia Oceania

65

16%

123

29%

220

47%

155

Australia

347

85%

368

86%

410

88%

64

- 169

100%

- 145

100%

- 119

100%

- 51

Europe

Japan
Non-OECD
E. Europe/Eurasia
Russia
Asia

91

2%

19

0%

- 119

2%

- 210

122

29%

129

31%

124

29%

2

120

44%

123

45%

122

43%

2

- 140

4%

- 203

5%

- 309

7%

169

China

- 218

8%

- 127

5%

- 34

1%

- 184

India

- 181

33%

- 244

30%

- 341

25%

160

Indonesia

337

87%

327

75%

354

64%

17

Middle East

-3

79%

-7

86%

-8

87%

5

Africa

60

27%

59

26%

49

17%

- 12

South Africa

65

31%

68

34%

76

39%

11

Latin America

52

59%

39

48%

25

30%

- 27

Colombia

77

93%

71

91%

67

87%

-9

World**

1 083

19%

1 062

19%

1 120

19%

37

European Union

- 175

46%

- 157

57%

- 95

67%

- 80

* Production in net-exporting regions. ** Total net exports for all WEO regions, not including intra-regional trade.
Notes: Positive numbers denote net exports and negative numbers denote net imports of coking and steam coal. OECD
and non-OECD trade should sum to zero; the difference in 2014 is due to stock changes.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Costs and industry structure
The coal industry differs from the oil and gas industry to the extent that capital expenditure
for exploration and development is modest and the bulk of the cost on the production
side accrues in the form of operational expenses (often termed cash costs or variable
costs). The variable cost of production (i.e. the cost of mining, upgrading, handling and
transportation) – expenses which can be avoided by closing an operation – constitutes a
218

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

price threshold below which an operation should cease production and shut down.5 For
older and fully amortised mines, generating a revenue that covers the variable costs is
often sufficient to warrant continued operation, while mines that still need to recover
their capital expenditure ideally require prices which exceed variable costs by a couple
of dollars. No rule is without exceptions: large projects that target untapped deposits and
require new infrastructure may need a substantial margin to breakeven, but such projects
typically also benefit from lower mining costs.
The variable costs of the mines around the 90th percentile of the cash-cost curve are
typically a reasonable indicator of the marginal costs of internationally traded coal (based
on the principle that the variable cost of the last mine needed to satisfy demand determines
the price). Marginal costs (excluding sea freight rates) dropped from $90/tonne in 2012 to
just under $70/tonne in 2014 and then to $60/tonne in 2015 (Figure 5.7). In 2012, price
setting mines had a margin of between $3-10/tonne (depending on which market they
were targeting) to cover sea freight rates and fixed costs. This margin became negative by
a few dollars in 2015, meaning that marginal exporters were unable to cover their costs.
Figure 5.7 ⊳ FOB cash costs and market volume for global seaborne steam
Dollars per tonne (nominal)

coal trade

125

Cash cost curves:
2012
2014
2015

100
75
50
25

0

150

300

450

600

750

900
1 050
Million tonnes

Coal prices and FOB cash costs for internationally traded steam coal
have decreased markedly between 2012 and 2015
Notes: Dotted lines represent seaborne steam coal trade volume and corresponding marginal FOB (free on board) cash
costs. FOB cash costs include: mining costs; costs of coal washing and preparation; inland transport; mine overhead; and
port charges. While standard definitions of cash costs often exclude royalties and taxes, they are included here. Seaborne
shipping costs and capital cost are excluded.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Sources: IEA analysis; Wood Mackenzie databases.
5. Some variable costs can be avoided immediately by stopping production (e.g. fuel or explosives) while avoiding
others, such as labour cost, may take longer. In most countries, transportation costs are a variable cost component, but
where take-or-pay contracts are used, for instance in Australia, they effectively are a fixed cost component.

Chapter 5 | Coal market outlook

219

5

S P O T L I G H T
Could cutthroat competition prolong the coal industry crisis?
The global coal market is suffering from excess capacity and low prices. Although many
mines have been idled or closed, the effect on markets has been more than offset by
expanding production from lower cost producers which effectively impeded the market
from finding its way back to balance. Prices bottomed out in early 2016 and have
recovered since then but, given the dire financial situation of many coal companies in
late 2015, the price recovery has only just started to lift producers out of the red. The
majority of Chinese coal firms still remain unprofitable and the future of the fifty US
coal companies that are under bankruptcy protection is uncertain. Producers targeting
the international market are now largely covering their cash costs, but profit margins
remain slim (with the exception of coking coal).
The answers as to why coal companies keep on churning out coal despite losing money
are many. Much has to do with the cost structure of the industry in which the bulk of
the costs are variable rather than fixed. As long as prices exceed the variable costs,
operating assets contribute to service liabilities or take-or-pay obligations. Additional
debt, unless lenders pull out, can keep companies going for a long time, despite
increasing the companies’ liabilities and thus worsening the situation. Another part
of the answer lies with market expectations. Like other extractive industries, the
coal industry is used to business cycles with extended boom-and-bust periods. Many
company executives believe that current losses will be more than offset once the
market tightens and that keeping assets operational will pay off in the future.
Competition in the coal industry leads to producers cutting prices in the hope that
their rivals will have to exit the market. Economic theory suggests that this triggers
an adjustment process in which excess capacity is shed and only the most efficient
producers survive. However, collective over-optimism in the industry is capable of
delaying this adjustment. This notion is not incompatible with a general expectation
in the industry of decline; it simply means that the industry consistently acts as if it
expects a better outcome than what turns out in the future.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

The coal industry is often a major employer. High unemployment in a coal producing
country could trigger a downward spiral in wages (or other employee benefits), as a
low income is preferable to unemployment if chances of finding a new job are slim.
This effect lowers the cost base and gives companies additional headroom to stay in
business and further cut prices. As well, the costs of closing a mine or transferring it to
care and maintenance may be significant; as long as the mine is just able to cover its
variable costs, the company may want it to keep producing.
These potentially detrimental effects of too much competition are difficult to
counteract; market-based mechanisms, such as price floors and scrappage bonuses are
unlikely to have the desired effect. The Chinese are tackling the problem through direct

220

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

intervention: in the period to 2020 up to 1 000 million tonnes per annum of coal
mining capacity is to be shed. Successful implementation of these measures underpins
our projections for China, while the outcome for many other regions rests on market
forces restoring a broad market balance by the mid-2020s. Failure to reduce excess
capacity or delays in the process, whether market led or administratively managed,
could significantly prolong the current industry crisis and leave coal prices at rock
bottom for much longer than is projected in the New Policies Scenario.
This analysis confirms that in recent years a growing number of mines continued to produce
steam coal despite prices below their variable costs. We estimate that in 2015 over 15% of
the mining capacity supplying the international market was not covering all of its variable
costs. Despite the various factors described in the Spotlight that could leave coal markets
unbalanced for a long time, our New Policies Scenario assumes that a combination of policy
measures to cut capacity and market forces trigger a balancing process that re-establishes
the paradigm of coal prices largely being set by the marginal cost of coal supply, with
operating mines covering all their costs. This assumption also underpins our price trajectory
in the period to the mid-2020s. As a result, the New Policies Scenario sees European and
Japanese steam coal import prices rebound to $70/tonne and $73/tonne respectively in
2025, and thereafter increase gradually to $77/tonne and $80/tonne in 2040 while Chinese
coastal steam coal prices increase to almost $90/tonne in 2040 (see Chapter 1.2.2).
As seen, coal companies around the world have successfully managed to bring down the
cost of production. Productivity gains, primarily achieved through workforce reductions and
economies of scale to lower unit costs, together with the deferral of capital expenditure
to sustain production and high-grading (selective mining of the least-cost deposits) have
all helped to cut costs. External factors, such as a drop in the price of consumables like
fuel, explosives, tyres and steel, together with foreign exchange rate effects, have also
contributed to the drop in coal production costs (Box 5.2).

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Box 5.2 ⊳ The impact of exchange rates on coal prices

All major coal price indices show that coal prices, denominated in US dollars (USD) have
been in decline for four consecutive years, suggesting that the supply side would react to
this drop in prices by reducing output. Indeed, many coal mines have been closed around
the world; but exports from key countries such as Australia, South Africa, Russia and
Colombia have been either increasing or have stayed flat. The reason for this resilience
in the face of decreasing prices lies partly in exchange rate effects (see Chapter 1.2.1).
Since coal trade is mostly settled in US dollars, coal exporters generate revenues in
dollars but pay for most of their costs in roubles (RUB), Colombian pesos (COP), rand
(ZAR) or Australian dollars (AUD). The US dollar has gained strongly in value against other
major currencies, especially since mid-2014. As a result, while coal prices expressed in
US dollars have fallen since mid-2012, they stayed rather flat in key exporters’ currencies

Chapter 5 | Coal market outlook

221

5

(Figure 5.8). Devaluation of the coal exporters’ currencies allows them to accept lower
US dollar denoted coal prices so long as their revenues, exchanged into domestic
currency, still cover their costs.

Index (Aug-2012 = 100)

Figure 5.8 ⊳ Change in coal prices in local currencies and US dollars
160

Vostochny, Russia:
Roubles (RUB)
Dollars (USD)

140

Richards Bay, South Africa:
Rand (ZAR)
Dollars (USD)

120
100

Newcastle, Australia:
Dollars (AUD)
Dollars (USD)

80

Puerto Bolivar, Colombia:
Pesos (COP)
Dollars (USD)

60
40
Aug-12

Aug-13

Aug-14

Aug-15

Coal prices have hardly decreased in local currencies
Sources: IHS Energy (2016); IEA analysis.

Investment

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Investment activity has varied around the world in recent years. In the export-oriented coal
industry, capital spending for new projects has now largely dried up, in response to low coal
prices. In China, coal mining and power generation projects have moved ahead despite the
slowing outlook for demand, adding to the problem of over-capacity (IEA, 2016b). There is
still money going into new projects in China, but the government has tightened its control
over project approvals. In India, however, strong demand fundamentals justify continued
capital spending, leaving investment activity unaffected by the prevalent excess capacity
on the international market.
In the New Policies Scenario, cumulative investments of some $1.1 trillion are needed in the
global coal supply chain over the next 25 years (Table 5.6). Three-quarters of the spending
is for mining, with the remainder for infrastructure. While investment in an over-supplied
market sounds like a paradox at first, a detailed look at the underlying drivers explains why
considerable capital spending for coal supply is needed. To keep an existing mine operational,
substantial capital needs to be spent over its lifetime (maintenance and replacement
of machinery and equipment). This spending, termed “sustaining capital expenditure”,
accounts for nearly half of the mining investment over the projection period. The typical
lifetime of a mine is around 25 years. This implies that many of the mines built during the
coal bonanza in the first decade of this century start to near depletion from the mid-2020s.
222

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

Partial replacement of this capacity requires investment in brownfield expansion and new
greenfield projects. Coal production growth rates differ by region and so does investment.
India, along with some other countries, expands its coal production rapidly, increasing its
mining investment. While a future supply gap, caused by a lack of investment, seems much
less likely in coal than in oil and gas, it is clear that current price levels are insufficient to
mobilise all the investment required in the New Policies Scenario. Divestment campaigns that
try to hinder access to finance or increase the cost of financing coal projects have so far had
only limited effects on mining investments. That said, the movement is growing and could
eventually create considerable barriers for coal investments, especially in OECD countries.

5

Table 5.6 ⊳ Cumulative coal supply investment by region in the
New Policies Scenario, 2016-2040 ($2015 billion)
Mining
Capacity
additions

Maintenance

Total

Ports
and rail

Total

Annual
average

OECD

82

87

169

37

206

8.2

Americas

23

36

58

10

68

2.7

17

29

45

8

54

2.1

4

5

9

12

21

0.8
4.7

United States
Europe
Asia Oceania

56

46

102

15

117

Australia

56

46

102

2

104

4.2

Non-OECD

351

330

681

183

864

34.5

30

31

61

22

83

3.3

20

22

42

14

56

2.2

E. Europe/Eurasia
Russia
Asia

286

269

556

144

699

28.0

China

188

198

386

42

428

17.1

India

82

55

137

67

204

8.1

Indonesia

11

12

24

8

31

1.3

Middle East

0

0

0

1

1

0.0

Africa

23

22

45

13

58

2.3

South Africa

16

19

36

1

37

1.5

Latin America

11

8

19

3

22

0.9

11

7

18

1

19

0.7

Colombia
Shipping

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

66

66

2.6

World

433

417

850

286

1 135

45.4

3

5

8

9

17

0.7

European Union

5.3.3 Regional insights
© OECD/IEA, 2016

China
Coal fuelled China’s rapid economic ascent in the first decade of this century, with
demand growth rates averaging 10% per year between 2000 and 2010. Today, China is of
paramount importance to developments in the global coal market, accounting for around
Chapter 5 | Coal market outlook

223

half of the world’s coal consumption and production. Even though India overtook China
as the largest coal importer in 2015, China’s coastline remains the main price arbitrage
point indicating the state of the international coal trade. China has the largest coal-fired
power plant fleet in the world and its equipment manufacturers, financiers and project
developers have become increasingly active in coal plant investments around the world.
No other country produces more steel or cement than China – two industries which are
traditionally heavily coal-reliant. Yet, the abundantly available fuel has made inroads into
less typical applications, such as drying processes in agriculture or providing feedstock for
the chemical industry. A considerable amount of coal is also still burned in households for
heating. As a result, only a little more than half of China’s coal consumption is for power
generation (the share is much higher in all other major coal-consuming countries).
But China is changing: coal demand growth stalled in 2014 and 2015 saw its coal use decrease
by an estimated 2.6%, marking 2013 as the peak year of coal demand in China, at 2 900 Mtce.
It cannot be excluded that exceptionally strong electricity demand growth, coupled with
poor hydropower availability (due to dry weather) and a surge in industrial production (e.g.
due to a fiscal stimulus package) might, over the medium term, lead to a new, transient
spike in coal demand that exceeds the historical peak. However, our analysis shows that all
fundamentals point to Chinese coal demand having now entered a slow decline, dropping in
the New Policies Scenario to 2 520 Mtce in 2040, down 13% from today’s level.
The government’s efforts to shift the economy from heavy industries towards a more
services sector oriented growth model are bearing fruit: output from the steel and cement
industries peaked in 2014, weighing on coal use in the industrial sector. Scrap availability
increases rapidly over the projection period, spurring greater use of electric arc furnaces
which gradually displace some of the traditional (coke-based) basic oxygen furnaces
(Figure 5.9). Moreover, China’s weight in the global steel market declines over time. Today,
Chinese steel mills produce around half of the world’s steel, but this share drops to 30% in
2040 as the country’s economy transforms.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Coal use as feedstock for the petrochemical industry in China exhibits strong growth rates.
Growth would be stronger if it were not for up to 25 million tonnes (Mt) of annual methanol
imports that temper coal demand growth in the coal-to-olefins process by almost 40 Mtce
per year. Nonetheless the growth of coal feedstock is insufficient to offset the declines in
other industrial applications. By 2040, coal use in industry amounts to nearly 900 Mtce
down from 1 170 Mtce in 2014.
The transformation of China’s power sector is making significant progress, with an
additional 63 gigawatts (GW) of renewable energy resources and 8.2 GW of nuclear added
in 2015, compared with some 52 GW of new coal capacity (Box 5.3). Over the Outlook
period, power generation from wind, nuclear and solar photovoltaic (PV) increases by 8%,
9% and 13% per year respectively. Although coal remains the backbone of the electricity
system in China, its share in the power mix gradually drops from 73% in 2014 to 43% in
2040. Coal use in China’s power sector has not peaked yet in the New Policies Scenario
but rebounds slightly over the medium term as electricity demand growth picks up again
224

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

(electricity consumption was flat in 2015), calling on coal-fired power generation. Power
sector diversification and increasing generation efficiency lead to a peak in power sector
coal use around 2030 at some 1 510 Mtce, only marginally up from 1 495 Mtce in 2014.
Coal burn in power generation then drops to less than 1 430 Mtce in 2040.
Figure 5.9 ⊳ Steel output by production route in China and the rest of the
Million tonnes

world in the New Policies Scenario

1 400

Electric arc
furnace

1 200

Basic oxygen
furnace

1 000
800
600
400

2014

2020

2025

2030

2035

ROW

China

ROW

China

ROW

China

China
ROW

ROW

China

ROW

China

200

2040

A declining share of basic oxygen furnaces in Chinese and
global steel production weighs on coking coal demand

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Note: ROW = rest of the world.

The recent slowdown in coal demand growth has hit the Chinese coal industry hard. Coal
companies had made investments in the expectation of much stronger demand growth,
resulting in an over-capacity in mining that some market observers estimate at between
1 000 and 1 500 million tonnes per annum (Mtpa) (more than the entire capacity of US
mines). Coal prices in 2015 dropped to levels that allowed less than 20% of the country’s
coal companies to cover their costs. The government has started tackling the issue by
ordering capacity cuts. This is embedded in a wider macroeconomic strategy to reduce
reliance on the heavy industrial sectors and therefore extends also to other industries like
steel, where over-capacity is similarly dire. Specifically, the government has started taking
measures to speed up mine closures (especially mines that are considered unsafe) while
also increasing the hurdles for new mine approvals and reducing the official working days in
coal mines from 330 days per year to 276 days. Overall, the authorities aim to cut capacity
of 1 000 Mtpa by 2020 (additionally, capacity cuts of 100-150 Mtpa are planned for the
steel industry). The reduced working days schedule, implemented in the second-quarter
of 2016, alone has led to a reduction in annual output by 500-600 Mt, suggesting that, in
combination with the other measures, the official target may be exceeded. The measures
implemented so far have proven effective: much of the coal price rally since the secondquarter of 2016 is due to a tighter supply and demand balance in the Chinese market which
Chapter 5 | Coal market outlook

225

5

has also lifted imports above 2015 levels. As of September 2016, Chinese authorities were
partly relaxing the capacity controls, for example allowing temporary exceptions from the
working days rules for the most efficient producers in order to cushion price spikes and
foster a smooth rebalancing of the coal market. The challenge for policy-makers in China
is to strike a careful balance between the depth of the capacity cuts, job losses and price
jumps (increases in coal prices eat into the margins of electricity generators or lead to
higher regulated power tariffs).
Whether the 1 000 Mtpa capacity reduction target in 2020 will be attained and be sufficient
to bring the market back into balance, remains an open question. While coal demand is
declining and capacity is being shed, there is still a substantial amount of new mining
capacity in the investment pipeline that may come on stream over the next couple of years.
Estimates on how much new capacity is ready to go ahead, if authorised, range between
700 and 900 Mtpa.
The New Policies Scenario sees coal production in China at 2 490 Mtce in 2040, down from
2 700 Mtce in 2014. Chinese net coal imports peaked at nearly 250 Mtce in 2013 before
dropping by 12% in 2014 and by a further 26% in 2015. Our projections see a continued
fall in net imports to around 35 Mtce in 2040. These coal production and trade trends are
based on the assumption that sufficiently deep capacity cuts are implemented over the
medium term, while investment activity is limited to productivity improvements, productionsustaining capital expenditure and advanced projects. Despite the efforts of policy-makers
to smoothen the transition, there remains a risk that the volatility in coal production and
pricing in China will increase over the coming years. The repercussions will be felt on the
international market too. The result is stronger fluctuations in Chinese imports on a monthly
basis – especially over the medium term – as imports increasingly take over a balancing role
for small mismatches between demand and domestic supply. Year-to-date import data for
2016 suggest an increase in import volumes over the previous year. So, while the long-term
import trend is set for decline, the road ahead may prove to be bumpy.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Box 5.3 ⊳ China’s coal plant conundrum

Utilisation rates of coal-fired power plants in China are falling rapidly, as new plants
enter an electricity system in which renewables have expanded fast and demand has
slowed markedly. Despite this, over 110 GW of plant is under construction and some
investors are still proposing new plants (Platts, 2016). Why? The average capacity factor
of thermal power plants in China dropped by nearly 10% in 2015, implying that the
plants ran only during 4 360 hours of the year – a capacity factor of less than 50%. In
most OECD countries, alarm bells ring with investors when coal plant utilisation drops
below 70%. The capital cost of coal plants is normally high, up to $2 000 per kilowatt
(kW) for a supercritical coal plant in Europe, requiring the plant to supply baseload
electricity to earn sufficiently high revenues to recoup the upfront investment. The
situation is different in China where overnight costs are substantially lower at $700/kW

226

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

for a similar plant. Based on regulated power tariffs of around $50-60 per megawatthour (MWh) in 2015, an investor can expect a positive return as long as the plant runs
for more than 2 800 hours per year, i.e. achieves a 32% capacity factor (Figure 5.10).
Although Chinese investors may have planned for higher capacity factors (and would
no doubt welcome them), the current market conditions with low coal prices, low
capital costs, attractive financing and generous power tariffs leave sufficient room
for a further decline in the average coal plant utilisation before the incentives to
build new plants vanish – whether coal plants will be stranded is primarily dependent
on the evolution of the regulated power tariffs. The situation is strikingly different in
Europe, where current market conditions hardly allow existing coal plants to survive
– even if they achieve high capacity factors – let alone provide the incentive to build
new plants.
Figure 5.10 ⊳ Profit margin of a new Chinese coal plant and an existing
Dollars per MWh

European coal plant, 2015

20
10
0
-10
-20

New supercritical plant in China
Existing ultra-supercritical plant in Europe
25%

30%

35%

40%

45%

50%

55%

60%

65%

70%

75% 80% 85%
Capacity factor

Profit margins of Chinese coal plants remain positive even at low capacity factors,
underpinning continued investment in new plants

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Focus: Could China become a net exporter of coal again?
China, a major coal exporter at the beginning of the first decade of this century, saw net
exports peak at 87 Mtce in 2001 when it was the second-largest exporter after Australia.
Only eight years later, China was a net importer of coal. Not only the shift, but also the
magnitude of the subsequent import growth, took many coal companies and market
observers by surprise. Similarly, the sudden and steep drop in coal imports in 2014 and
2015 came rather unexpectedly. Many are wondering whether Chinese imports could
disappear as rapidly as they emerged, possibly even turning the country into a net exporter
again.

Chapter 5 | Coal market outlook

227

5

Mtce

Figure 5.11 ⊳ Chinese coal trade in the New Policies Scenario
300

200

100

Imports

0
Exports
-100
1990

2000

2010

2020

2030

2040

Although the fundamentals point to a long-term decline in imports,
China remains a net importer of coal over the Outlook period

© OECD/IEA, 2016

This question is not easy to answer. While China’s net trade position is critical for coal
exporters around the world, it remains a comparably small item in China’s coal supply
balance (currently less than 10% of demand) which is very sensitive to the vicissitudes
of the domestic coal market. In the New Policies Scenario, China remains a net importer
of coal throughout the projection period albeit on a declining trend, with net imports
dropping from 220 Mtce in 2014 to around 35 Mtce in 2040 (Figure 5.11). Three interrelated assumptions underpin this view:


State interventions to influence the trade balance or distort the economics of domestic
coal vis-à-vis imported coal remain minimal.



Chinese authorities successfully implement capacity cuts in the coal industry to
re-establish a balanced coal market, while creating enough jobs in other sectors to
avoid undue stress in the labour market.



The bulk of domestic coal production remains costlier than imports along China’s
southern coast.

Our cost estimates suggest that, on average, imported coal currently has a cost advantage
of around 10% over domestic coal in coastal regions (Figure 5.12). This narrows slightly
over the projection period, as industry restructuring and mine consolidation in China
brings some productivity gains (mainly due to economies of scale). It would narrow further
if productivity gains end up higher than expected, although increasing labour costs and the
need to tap deeper deposits might limit the effect of productivity improvements on costs.
In addition, taxes play an important role in the coal market. In the past, taxation has been
a good mirror image of China’s role on the international market, with changes of tax rates
228

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

that either encouraged or discouraged exports.6 Tax rebates or even subsidies could flip
the economics in favour of domestic coal.
Cutting more than 1 000 Mtpa of mining capacity between today and the early 2020s could
result in the loss of some 0.9-1.3 million coal mining jobs. Bearing in mind that tackling
over-capacity is not confined only to the coal industry, the government needs to create
a significant number of jobs in other sectors and cushion social hardship for those who
stay unemployed. Backing out imports reduces the pressure to slash capacity and buys
additional time to strengthen other sectors of the economy. Even deliberately exporting
coal at a loss may have an appeal if the avoided social costs (e.g. unemployment benefits)
outweigh the losses from coal exports. In either case, the costs accrue primarily to China’s
state budget, due to the high level of state-ownership in the coal industry.
Figure 5.12 ⊳ Average costs of steam coal delivered to southern coastal
Dollars per tonne (adjusted to 6 000 kcal/kg)

China by origin, 2015

Coastal
Chinese price

80

Japanese
import price

60

Chinese taxes
Shipping

40

Free-on-board cost

20

Imports

Domestic supply

Imported steam coal has a cost advantage over domestic coal in southern coastal China

© OECD/IEA, 2016

A decline in the average cost of Chinese coal by 20% (delivered to the coast) – achieved
either through productivity gains or state support – could enable net exports of up to
50 Mtce by the mid-2020s. Taking the displaced Chinese imports into account, the net
effect on international trade would add up to some 180 Mtce. Primary markets for Chinese
exports would be nearby importers (e.g. Korea, Japan, Viet Nam, Philippines) where
competition with Indonesian, Australian and Russian exporters would be fierce. Such a shift
in China’s trade balance could sustain the imbalance on the international market, keeping
6. Chinese coal exports in the early 2000s were supported by a 13% export tax rebate which was removed in 2006. In the
same year, the government introduced a 5% export tariff to discourage exports of increasingly scarce coking coal. Only
two years later the export tax was lifted to 10% and expanded to include steam coal. In the context of the growing overcapacity the export tax level was reduced to 3% in 2015. Since 2009, a value-added-tax of 17% is levied on all coal sales.

Chapter 5 | Coal market outlook

229

5

prices depressed for much longer. Even a price decline of $5-8/tonne on the international
market is unlikely to trigger much additional demand. In most countries that plan to expand
their use of coal, coal is already markedly cheaper than gas or renewables, and a coal price
drop does not flip the economics, while countries that have decided as an act of policy to
reduce their reliance on coal are unlikely to revisit their decision due to a fall in coal prices.

United States
The United States is the second-largest coal producer accounting for 12% of world coal
production. It is also the second-largest coal consumer (although preliminary data for 2015
suggest that India may have overtaken the United States). In 2014, US coal consumption
amounted to nearly 620 Mtce, over 90% of which was used in the power sector. But coal
has been on a declining trend for the last couple of years, as a result of strong competition
from abundant and low-cost natural gas and policy measures to reduce air pollution from
power generation mainly targeting sulfur dioxide (SO2), mercury, particulate matter and
nitrogen oxides (NOx).
Over the medium term, the Mercury and Air Toxics Standard will continue to push
coal plants into retirement. The cost of control technology retrofits can be significant
($200-400/kW) and the US coal-fired fleet is among the world’s oldest (half of the fleet
is older than 40 years and 85% of the plants are older than 30 years) and least efficient,
making companies think twice before investing additional money. Moreover, coal’s role
as a low-cost source of baseload power is increasingly challenged by gas, which traded at
$2.6 per million British thermal units (MBtu) on average in 2015. For the first time ever,
power generation from gas was on a par with output from coal in 2015 reflecting a 14%
drop in coal-fired output while gas-fired generation increased by 18%.
Figure 5.13 ⊳ Electricity generation by source and power sector CO2

© OECD/IEA, 2016

5

2.5

4

2.0

3

1.5

2

1.0

1

0.5

1990

2000

2010

2020

2030

Gt

Thousand TWh

emissions in the United States in the New Policies Scenario
Renewables
Nuclear
Gas
Oil
Coal
CO2 emissions
(right axis)

2040

Coal loses out to renewables and natural gas as the Clean Power Plan is realised

230

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

The Clean Power Plan which targets reductions of CO2 emissions from the power sector
of 32% by 2030 (compared with 2005 levels) and the Carbon Pollution Standard, which
sets stringent CO2 emission limits for new power plant, are important influences in the
New Policies Scenario. In the longer term, these policies tighten the constraints on the
role of coal in power generation while favouring gas-fired and renewable technologies
(Figure 5.13). New coal plants can be built only if they meet a CO2 limit of 1 400 pounds per
MWh (approximately 635 grammes of CO2 per kWh), effectively requiring some sort of CO2
capture unit to be installed. As a result, coal use in the power sector is projected to decrease
by 45% between 2014 and 2040. The multi-year extensions of tax credits for wind and solar
PV, decided in December 2015, will support stronger deployment of renewables over the
medium term. With CO2 reduction targets unchanged, additional output from renewables
reduces the need for coal-to-gas switching to meet the emissions targets, resulting in a
slight upward revision of the long-term outlook for coal use in power, compared with last
year’s edition of the WEO.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

The adverse market conditions for coal have taken their toll on the industry in the United
States. In the first half of 2016, the country’s two largest producers, Arch Coal and Peabody
Energy both filed for bankruptcy protection, adding to the list of some fifty US coal
companies that have done so since 2012. At the time of writing, nearly half of the country’s
coal production was under bankruptcy protection. Although industry consolidation and
permanent mine closures are already underway – we estimate that since early 2015 some
40 Mtpa of capacity have been shut down (IEA, 2015a) – further capacity cuts are inevitable
if the US coal market is to find its way to an economically sustainable balance. Even so,
our price projections for all major coal basins in the United States, suggest that in the
New Policies Scenario, barring productivity improvements, three-quarters of the currently
installed mining capacity could be profitably operated for its remaining lifetime once the
debt restructuring of the highly leveraged coal companies is accomplished (Figure 5.14).
Our Outlook for US coal production and prices assumes that the industry as a whole operates
on a financially sound basis from the early 2020s although there is a possibility that this
recovery will be delayed (Spotlight). US coal production drops from around 695 Mtce in
2014 to 390 Mtce in 2040 largely as a result of the demand-side constraints on coal-fired
generation. Exports provide very limited relief: net coal shipments from the United States
have been in steep decline for three consecutive years, falling to an estimated 53 Mtce
in 2015, just over half the historical highs of around 100 Mtce. This declining trend is set
to continue over the projection period, albeit at a slower pace, with coal exports from
the United States at 20 Mtce in 2040. Opportunities to place coal on the international
market are increasingly limited for US producers. If the projected decline in Chinese
imports is realised (and bearing in mind the difficulties of building export infrastructure),
the prospects of exporting larger quantities of coal from the US west coast are bleak while
the ramp-up of coking coal exports from Mozambique will increase competition in Brazil
and Europe – key export markets for US coking coal producers. In the shrinking European
steam coal import market, Colombian producers have a clear cost advantage, not leaving
much room for US steam coal exports either.
Chapter 5 | Coal market outlook

231

5

Figure 5.14 ⊳ Average cash-margins of existing US coal mining capacities
in the New Policies Scenario

The bulk of the US capacity can earn positive margins on operating costs,
but debt restructuring is key to the financial viability of the industry
Notes: tpa = tonnes per annum. Net present value of cash-flows calculated for some 300 coal mines in the United States,
based on 2015 costs, under the price trajectories for key US mining regions in the New Policies Scenario.
Sources: IEA analysis; WoodMackenzie databases.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

India
Rapid economic development and strong population growth propel India’s energy
demand upwards. Coal is projected to remain a key element in India’s energy economy,
increasing its share in primary energy demand from 46% today to 48% in 2040. India’s
coal consumption then reaches 1 340 Mtce (up from 540 Mtce in 2014). Building
infrastructure and housing requires a large expansion of heavy industries’ output, such
as steel and cement, the production of which relies primarily on coal (Figure 5.15).
Industrial coal demand increases to 560 Mtce in 2040, three-and-a-half times more than
today. Power generation expands by almost three-and-a-half times over the projection
period and around half of this growth – an additional 1 400 TWh – comes from coalfired stations. India’s coal-fired power plant fleet grows by 260 GW, reaching 450 GW
in 2040 (the second-largest coal fleet after China in a single country). In the past, new
build plants chiefly relied on subcritical technology; resulting in a relatively low fleet
efficiency of around 33% (high ash-levels of domestic coal and comparably high ambient
temperatures also weigh on efficiency). Over the Outlook period, new coal plants are
assumed mostly to use supercritical boiler technology, its share increasing to almost half
in 2040 (from 15% in 2014). This raises the fleet efficiency by four percentage points to
nearly 38%. The strong increase in coal-fired power generation over the period carries
with it the risk of a further deterioration in India’s already bad air quality, if it is not
countered by stringent pollution regulations (Box 5.4).
232

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

Figure 5.15 ⊳ Incremental coal demand to 2040 by key sector in India
Index (2014 = 0%)

in the New Policies Scenario

500%

Cement production
Steel production

400%

Electricity generation
Coal use

300%

5

Power

Iron and steel

651 Mt

27 Mtce

322 Mt

190 Mtce

2 966 TWh

100%

403 Mtce

200%

Cement

Coal use is propelled by a surge in electricity generation, and steel and cement production

Coal production in India grew by some 7% in 2014, up from 1% in 2013 and 5% growth in
2012, and it is estimated to have grown at 6% in 2015. The growth in coal output came mainly
on the back of Coal India Ltd (CIL, the country’s main coal producer) achieving productivity
gains in existing mines and rolling out improved technology. Periodic mismatches between
production and demand in India are symptomatic of some unresolved issues with the structure
and operation of both the coal and power markets. The precarious financial situation of the
Discoms (electricity transmission and distribution companies), which often make losses on
every kilowatt-hour of electricity they sell, in combination with unreliable power supply,
constrains electricity demand growth. Moreover, domestic coal is primarily sold via supply
contracts (“linkages”) between CIL and individual buyers which require the coal to be used in
a designated plant. Only limited quantities of domestic coal are sold to consumers without
such a limitation and also at a significantly higher price (via “e-auctions”), plus many industrial
consumers and independent power producers do not have a supply contract of any kind
with CIL. This system prevents much of the additional output from being marketed, currently
resulting in considerable stockpiling of coal at the mines. The government has started to
tackle this by proposing a scheme that increases the flexibility in the use of coal purchased via
supply contracts. The new scheme would allow domestic coal purchases to be re-distributed,
but still only within the portfolio of a company’s plants.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

5

The New Policies Scenario assumes gradual electricity market reform and increasing use of
market-based mechanisms to allocate domestic coal. The combination of these measures
is a prerequisite for coal demand growth in India to pick up over the projection period
and for domestic production to be distributed efficiently. There are important implications
for global coal markets. While coal production in India expands from around 360 Mtce in
Chapter 5 | Coal market outlook

233

2014 to 1 000 Mtce in 2040, imports continue to increase, from 180 Mtce in 2014 to some
340 Mtce by the end of the period (although the import dependency declines notably from
a third in 2014 to a quarter in 2040). However, we argue that the underlying logic of imports
changes in the future. The bulk of the import growth seen over the past years was due
to shortage of domestic coal or systemic constraints (either transport, quality or market
constraints). For most consumers it would have been cheaper to procure domestic coal
had it been available. More competition in the coal industry and the use of market-based
mechanisms (user flexibility for domestic coal purchases, auctioning of supply contracts,
competitive spot markets) gradually eliminate the cost gap between domestic production
and imports, i.e. leading to a convergence of domestic and international coal prices
(IEA, 2015b). This development has important implications: first, it allows for arbitrage
opportunities and economic imports along India’s coastlines and second, it supports the
roll-out of modern mining technology to tap more complex coal deposits in India.
India, together with Southeast Asia and parts of Africa, is the only growth area in an
otherwise depressed international coal market. Strong coal import growth in India
has been anticipated and prepared for by the export-oriented coal industry around the
world. However, there is considerable uncertainty around the achievement of the import
trajectory presented in the New Policies Scenario: while there is a strong economic case
for coal imports, they are politically unpopular in India and policy-makers have repeatedly
stated their intention to reduce coal imports. Although the stagnation of coal imports in
2015, after years of strong growth, had more to do with sluggish demand growth amidst a
jump in domestic output, a scenario in which India successfully and persistently reduces its
imports cannot be discarded.
Box 5.4 ⊳ Coal use and air quality

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Combustion processes typically generate various pollutants, such as particulate matter
(PM), sulfur dioxide (SO2) and nitrogen oxides (NOx) that, when released into the air,
have adverse effects on human health and the environment. Coal-fired boilers in
industry, power generation and other sectors account for nearly 60% of the global
emissions of SO2 and 15% of the worldwide emissions of NOx and PM2.5 (particulates
with a size of 2.5 microns or less, which are particularly harmful to human health).

A suite of technologies is available to mitigate air pollution emissions from coal
combustion: for instance, electrostatic precipitators or fabric filters can remove more
than 99% of the PM from flue gas, while the most advanced scrubbers can achieve
similar removal of SO2. Selective non-catalytic reduction is an example of a technology
that can achieve NOx removal rates of up to 90% in commercial power plants. The
cost of these technologies is far from being prohibitive, but their introduction requires
regulatory action to ensure that investors plan their new power station projects with
appropriately advanced control technology while also retrofitting the existing fleet.
In the New Policies Scenario, coal-fired power generation grows more in India and

234

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

Southeast Asia than anywhere else in the world over the next 25 years. The rapid
growth anticipated in this scenario implies that the bulk of the coal plants operational
in 2040 are yet to be built in these systems (300 GW in India and 135 GW in Southeast
Asia are built over the Outlook period), providing the opportunity to require them to
be built to meet high standards of pollution control.
India tightened the limits for pollutant emissions substantially in December 2015
and if applied in concert with efficiency improvements, these measures can deliver a
marked improvement in ambient air quality, despite strong growth in energy demand.
The New Policies Scenario shows that enforcing compliance with these rules leads
to a drop in the emissions of SO2, PM2.5 and NOx from power generation by around
90%, 75% and 20%, respectively, through 2040 (IEA, 2016c). In Southeast Asia, there
is considerable scope to increase the stringency of emission limits for power plants. In
the absence of more ambitious standards, the strong growth in electricity demand of
the New Policies Scenario suggests that emissions of SO2 from power generation grow
by some 85%, emissions of PM2.5 double and emissions of NOx increase two-and-a-half
times over the Outlook period.

Major exporters

© OECD/IEA, 2016

In 2014, Australia regained the rank of the largest coal exporter from Indonesia. Australia is
critical to global coking coal supply: with relatively low supply costs and abundant reserves
it provides over 60% of internationally traded coking coal. The coal industry in Australia is
performing better in the current situation of over-capacity than many of its rivals. Strict
cost-cutting, productivity improvements and a devaluation of the Australian dollar against
the US dollar spurred a drop in the average cash-cost of exported coal by some 35%
between 2012 and 2015. Australian exports are projected to increase to 410 Mtce in 2040,
up from 350 Mtce in 2014, increasing Australia’s share in international trade from 32%
to 36% (Figure 5.16). In light of the declining import trend in China, the need to tap new
deposits in Australia’s Surat and the remote Galilee basins becomes increasingly tied to
the trajectory foreseen for coal imports in India. A tapering of India’s imports would make
the economics of remote projects that require infrastructure development increasingly
questionable.
Indonesia was hit hard by the coal glut in 2015, with exports dropping an estimated 10%
from some 340 Mtce in 2014, (on top of a 4% decline observed in 2014). This is a huge
turnaround from annual average export growth rates of over 15% between 2003 and 2013.
Unlike other exporters, Indonesia incurs a relatively high share of its costs in US dollars
and hence has not benefited from the appreciation of the dollar to the same extent as its
rivals. Moreover, mining operations in Indonesia are often relatively small and thus lack
the scope to gain economies of scale. It is estimated that up to 80 Mtpa of mining capacity
has been closed over the last two years, but these are flexible truck-and-shovel operations,
which could come back online quickly when prices rise. Indonesia has thus become a kind
Chapter 5 | Coal market outlook

235

5

of swing supplier that adjusts its output rapidly to price movements. Declining import
demand in China continues to affect the Indonesian coal industry over the projection
period, while India has become the most important buyer of its coal and remains so in our
Outlook. Indonesian exports do rebound, but at 355 Mtce in 2040 they only marginally
exceed the level reached in 2014. Moreover, the level of exports is highly dependent on
developments in India. Indonesian domestic demand increases four-fold, from 52 Mtce in
2014 to almost 200 Mtce in 2040 (for instance, the Indonesian utility PLN is pursuing a
fast-track programme to expand coal-fired power generation). Yet, the absolute growth
in domestic demand over the medium term is not strong enough to offset the decline in
exports, resulting in a dip in the country’s coal production in the next few years, before it
rebounds in the early 2020s and increases to some 550 Mtce in 2040.

Mtce

Figure 5.16 ⊳ Major exporters of coal by type in the New Policies Scenario
500
400

34%
32%

Coking
Steam

36%
32%
31%

% Share of
global trade

32%

300
200

Russia

Colombia

6% 7% 7%

2014
2030
2040

Indonesia

2014
2030
2040

2014
2030
2040

Australia

2014
2030
2040

2030
2040

2014

7% 6% 6%

9%

6%

4%

2014
2030
2040

11% 11% 11%

100

South Africa US and Canada

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Australia remains the largest coal exporter with strong exports of coking coal,
but Indonesia keeps the top position in steam coal

Despite the grim situation on the international coal market, Russia managed to expand its
exports by 15% in 2014 and, according to preliminary estimates, exports stayed flat in 2015.
With net exports standing at 120 Mtce in 2014, Russia was the third-largest coal exporter.
The country’s export resilience amidst the low price environment has been underpinned
by a marked depreciation of the rouble over the last two years which slashed Russian FOB
cash costs (the majority of the costs are for labour and transportation). Between 2012
and 2015, the average cost of Russian coal exports is estimated to have dropped by 37%.
Today, the bulk of the Russian exports are among the lowest-cost coal on the international
market (Figure 5.17). However, Russia’s competitiveness is somewhat impaired by the
declining import trends in its key markets (Europe, China, Japan and Korea), while the
growth centres in India and Southeast Asia are further away and involve an increase in
shipping cost. Russian exports stay largely flat, at current levels, over the Outlook period.
236

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

Figure 5.17 ⊳ Indicative FOB cash-cost range by key exporter and average

Dollars per tonne

coal price by type, 2015
Steam coal

150

Coking coal
FOB cost range
Average price

125
100
75
50

5
Australia

Canada

Mozambique

United States

Russia

Indonesia

South Africa

Colombia

Australia

25

Russia is now among the least-cost exporters of steam coal
while Australia holds the top position for coking coal

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Exports from Colombia increased by 4% in 2014 to 77 Mtce and are estimated to have
further increased in 2015. Although Colombia’s large mines benefit from low costs, the
country’s high exposure to the European market (currently around 70% of its coal is
exported to Europe) limits its future growth opportunities. Over the next ten years there
is some scope to displace South African and US coal from the European market, but in the
longer term the decline in market volume cannot be offset by growth in market share.
Colombian producers are increasingly forced to find ways to cut the transport cost to the
Indian Ocean. Colombian exports are projected to gradually decline to around 65 Mtce in
2040. The production decline is partially offset by increasing domestic consumption.
Coal companies in South Africa benefit from a low-cost position and a geographical
location that allows them to serve both the mature European market and the growing
Asian market. Nonetheless, the South African coal industry faces a considerable challenge
over the projection period: although domestic coal demand declines from 145 Mtce in
2014 to less than 120 Mtce in 2040 (as the country’s coal-fired generation fleet becomes
more efficient and renewable energy supply expands), depletion of the mature deposits
in Mpumalanga Province proceeds faster, requiring an expansion of coal production in
the remote Waterberg field in Limpopo Province. Our analysis suggests that South African
coal exports can increase over the next 25 years, to reach around 75 Mtce in 2040; but
the uncertainties to this trajectory are many: delays in further developing the Waterberg
could constrain the availability of coal for export (albeit not without a marked increase
in domestic prices) while high exposure to the Indian market makes export trends very
sensitive to the evolution of Indian import demand.
Chapter 5 | Coal market outlook

237

Mozambique has made great strides towards becoming an important player in the
international coking coal trade. First shipments of coal through the newly constructed
18 Mtpa Nacala corridor (a 900 km railway line linking the Moatize mine with the port of
Nacala) were made during 2015. Mozambican exports in 2015 are estimated at 4 Mtce,
similar to the level reached in 2014. Costs still exceed prices significantly, but they can be
expected to come down markedly over the medium term, as the new infrastructure allows
for economies of scale. Total coal exports are projected to exceed 25 Mtce in 2040. Further
expansion of the mines also spurs domestic coal plant developments that use some of the
steam coal by-product.
Virtually all of Canada’s net exports are coking coal. Its total net exports of coal decreased
by 15% in 2014, reaching 22 Mtce, and are estimated to have fallen further in 2015. In
the long run Canadian exports are projected to rebound to 2014 levels, with investment
primarily geared towards replacing depleted deposits, rather than gaining market share.

Major importers
No other major coal consuming country or region reduces its coal demand by more – in
relative terms – than the European Union over the next 25 years. By 2030, the European
Union intends to achieve a 40% cut in greenhouse-gas emission (compared with 1990
levels) and a 27% share of renewables total final energy consumption. Based on this, the
region continues to back out coal from its energy mix, slashing total demand by some
240 Mtce to around 140 Mtce in 2040. The scope for coal-fired generation is squeezed
relentlessly by renewables, particularly wind and solar PV, over the Outlook period such
that the share of renewables in power generation increases from 29% to 53% in 2040.
Domestic coal production declines from 215 Mtce to less than 50 Mtce in 2040. Meaningful
quantities of hard coal are produced only in Poland, while lignite production continues
in Germany and various countries in eastern and south-eastern Europe, albeit at much
lower levels than today. Imports fall less steeply than domestic production, dropping from
175 Mtce in 2014 to below 100 Mtce in 2040 (Figure 5.18).

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Japan’s coal imports decreased by around 3% in 2014 and are estimated to have been
flat in 2015, at just under 170 Mtce. Around 70% of Japanese imports are steam coal.
Japanese imports are projected to decline by over 30% to around 120 Mtce in 2040. The key
uncertainty for this trend is the restart of Japan’s nuclear fleet: the New Policies Scenario
assumes 17 GW will have restarted by 2020 and 27 GW by 2030, but there is significant
downside potential to this assumption. Korea’s imports are estimated to have increased 3%
in 2015, up from around 115 Mtce in 2014, but are projected to decline in the long term,
reaching some 70 Mtce in 2040, as alternative fuels increase their share in the power mix.
Total coal demand in the ten member countries of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) is projected to triple over the Outlook period, reaching 430 Mtce in 2040.
Only India experiences larger growth in absolute terms. Additional demand chiefly comes
from the power sector, where coal overtakes gas as the leading fuel within the coming five
years. Various countries in the region pursue coal plant projects (e.g. Thailand, Malaysia,
238

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

Philippines), but the biggest contributions to growth are expected from Indonesia and
Viet Nam, both of which also have significant domestic coal production. While Indonesia
will unsurprisingly remain fully self-sufficient, Viet Nam – once a considerable exporter
of anthracite to China – is now a net importer. Viet Nam’s coal production increases only
marginally over the projection period, implying increasing reliance on the international
market to meet the country’s coal needs. As a whole – exclusively due to Indonesia –
Southeast Asia remains a net exporter, but the net surplus shrinks as imports to the rest
of the region (an additional 130 Mtce over the projection period) grow much faster than
Indonesian exports.

5

Mtce

Figure 5.18 ⊳ Major importers of coal by type in the New Policies Scenario
375

Coking

25%
75%

300
225

Steam

99%

% Import
dependency

8%
100%

33%

46%

150
57%

67%

75

1%
2014 2040
India

2014 2040
Rest of Asia

2014 2040
Japan and
Korea

2014 2040
European
Union

2014 2040
China

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Despite Chinese imports plummeting, Asia dominates coal imports in 2040

Chapter 5 | Coal market outlook

239

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Chapter 6
Power sector outlook
A dispatch from the frontline of the energy transition

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Highlights

•

In the New Policies Scenario, electricity demand is projected to grow at 2% annually,
increasing by two-thirds to 2040, compared with global economic growth of 3.4%,
a marked change from the period 1990-2014 when they grew at almost the same
pace. Energy efficiency measures but also macroeconomic and demographic factors
slow electricity growth in several mature economies. Almost half of total global
electricity demand growth is in China and India, mainly in buildings (23%) and
industries (21%). All end-uses see their share of electricity increase, outside the
OECD countries, from 12% in 2000 to 23% of final use by 2040.

•

Electricity supply worldwide is set to diversify and decarbonise, with low-carbon
generation overtaking coal before 2020. Coal-fired power’s share of generation is
projected to fall from above 40% now to 28% in 2040. By then, wind, solar and
bioenergy-based renewables combined increase their market share from 6% to
20%. China generates almost all its incremental power from renewables, nuclear
and natural gas. Globally, by 2040 producing a unit of electricity is projected to emit
one-third less CO2 than today; but emissions from the power sector still rise by 6%.

•

The relationship between electricity demand and generating capacity is set to
change: every new unit of generation is likely to necessitate the provision of 40%
more capacity as over the period 1990-2010, as the renewables share of capacity
soars. The reason is that the capacity factor of renewables such as solar and wind is
lower than that of thermal power, the preferred plant choice of the earlier period.
Accordingly, installed power capacity is projected to approach 11 200 GW in 2040.
Renewables account for two-thirds of the increase.

•

The expansion and maintenance of the power sector is projected to require
$19.2 trillion investment through 2040, over 40% of it in transmission and
distribution. Some 35% of the investment in power generation serves to replace
plant retirements. Renewables account for 63% of the investment in new power
plants, fossil-fuelled ones for almost a quarter and nuclear for the remainder.

•

In the 450 Scenario, efficiency measures are projected to slow total electricity
demand growth over the period to 2040 to 30% less than in the New Policies
Scenario; the rise of electric vehicles does not offset lower demand in the buildings
and industry sectors. Unabated fossil fuel-fired generation falls from two-thirds of
the power mix to about 15% in 2040, the balance coming from low-carbon sources
(renewables, nuclear, and coal and gas fitted with CCS). Power sector emissions
of CO2 drop to a quarter of today’s levels. The power sector accounts for 60% of
emissions saved, relative to the New Policies Scenario.

Chapter 6 | Power sector outlook

241

6.1 Recent policy and market developments
Electricity is an essential component of modern societies and a key input to economic
growth. It constitutes just under one-fifth of global final energy consumption and its share
is steadily growing across all sectors. As the share of the services sector in the global
economy rises, the share of electricity demand in final energy use tends to rise too. Rising
incomes in developing countries are likely to lead to greater demand for electricity-based
energy services, such as cooling, refrigeration, lighting and digital services. Extending
reliable power availability to all citizens is a high priority in many developing countries, as
around 1.2 billion people still lack access to electricity.
Three observations capture the rising importance of the power sector in the broader energy
outlook. First, while inputs into power generation account for almost 40% of primary
energy requirements today, these inputs are projected to account for half the growth in
primary energy use to 2040. Second, investment in power plants and transmission and
distribution grids is projected to make up around 47% of the projected $15.3 trillion
investment in energy supply over the next decade. In some countries, large shares of
ageing generation assets are likely to need replacement, in others new power plants and
transmission lines will need to be built to fuel economic growth and satisfy the needs of
emerging middle classes. Third, the power sector (emissions from which currently account
for 42% of energy-related carbon-dioxide [CO2] emissions) is in the vanguard of efforts to
decarbonise the energy system. Electricity provides the means to use non-fossil fuels, e.g.
hydropower, nuclear and, increasingly, non-hydro renewables such as wind and solar, to
produce low-carbon final energy and to contribute to the decarbonisation of final uses
previously dependent on fossil fuels, for example by means of electric vehicles in transport
and efficient heat pumps in industry. Over the last decade, the number of countries with
targeted support for renewables (with a strong concentration in the power sector) grew
from less than 20 to over 150. The successful conclusion of the Paris Agreement in 2015 is
set to provide a further, powerful impetus to efforts to lower the carbon intensity of the
power sector.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

For the first time in 2015, additions of renewables-based generating capacity worldwide
exceeded those from all other energy sources taken together, and total installed renewables
capacity passed that of coal. (See Chapters 10-12 for more extensive discussions of
renewables, including their integration into electricity markets and IEA, 2016a). Among the
dispatchable1 technologies of hydro, bioenergy and geothermal, some 85 gigawatts (GW)
of new capacity has been added in the last two years. In these two years, the capacity of
variable renewables, chiefly wind and solar photovoltaics (PV), has expanded by 200 GW,
with a record 114 GW in 2015. Falling technology costs and policy support seem certain to
maintain this momentum (IEA, 2016b).

1. Technologies whose power output can be readily controlled – increased up to the maximum rated capacity or
decreased to zero – in order to match the supply of electricity with demand.
242

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

Between the start of 2015 and late 2016, 19 new nuclear reactors commenced operation,
(two-thirds of them in China), and construction has started on nine new reactors in the
same period. Currently, some 64 GW of new nuclear capacity is under construction,
principally in China, (one-third), but also in Russia, the United Arab Emirates, the United
States, Korea, the European Union and India. One-seventh of the global nuclear fleet is
40 years old or more, but moves are underway in some jurisdictions (e.g. the United States)
to extend nuclear plant lifetimes to 60 or even 80 years.
Among fossil fuels, coal and natural gas are the key energy sources of the global power
system. New coal-fired plants continue to be built; in 2014 and 2015, installed global
capacity increased by 125 GW (a 7% rise over 2013 levels). A further 250 GW was under
construction (and an additional 1 100 GW at various stages of planning). In the case of gas,
global capacity rose by more than 110 GW in 2014 and 2015 (again around a 7% rise), while
more than 140 GW is under construction, and a further 660 GW planned.
Growth in global electricity generation has shown a marked slowdown since 2013, rising
at only 1.5% per year, (less than half the rate of gross domestic product [GDP] growth)
with barely 1% in 2015. By contrast, in the period 1990-2012, demand for electricity
grew at 3% per year, almost in step with GDP growth of 3.4%. The slowdown in demand
growth, coupled with the expansion of renewable generating capacity, resulted in coalfired electricity output flattening in 2014, and falling in 2015 by around 3.5%, (reversing
the trend of strong continuous growth since the turn of the century). Gas-fired power grew
nearly 9% from 2013 to 2015. Total renewables generated electricity grew even faster,
overtaking gas-fired power in the global mix.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Of the increase in renewables-based electricity of nearly 500 terawatt-hours (TWh)
between 2013 and 2015, three-fifths came from wind power and PV, a contribution to
power generation equivalent to the total annual electricity production of Italy. These
changes caused the CO2 intensity of the global power sector to drop by 4% to 500 grammes
of carbon dioxide per kilowatt-hour (g CO2/kWh), and total emissions from the power
sector fell by around 2%. Given that the power sector has seen almost unbroken growth in
emissions over the last quarter century, (with the exception of a modest fall in the recession
years of 2008-2009), this is a notable development (see Chapter 8.2).
The interaction between low-carbon sources of electricity and power generated by
fossil fuels is a major issue for the power sector outlook. Support policies for newer
technologies, such as wind and solar, often include mandated shares of these generation
sources. Many renewable sources of power also have very low short-run marginal
costs, and so tend to be called upon ahead of coal and gas. As a result, even though
today’s lower prices for coal and gas increase their attractiveness, in many countries
these two fuels only have access to a shrinking share of the market, for which they
compete fiercely between themselves (IEA, 2016c). In addition, depressed wholesale
prices that are being seen in some markets are creating considerable uncertainty over
the business case for new investment in thermal generation capacity.
Chapter 6 | Power sector outlook

243

6

Recent years have seen major policy changes in a number of countries which are large
power users, notably China and the United States. These changes, which will have important
implications for the trajectory of their power sectors, are detailed in countries’ Nationally
Determined Contributions for COP 21, and are discussed in the regional insights section
which concludes this chapter.

6.2 Trends to 2040 by scenario
This section examines and contrasts trends in our three main scenarios.2 The evolution of the
power sector varies markedly across the scenarios, reflecting different policy choices affecting
demand and supply, including electricity prices. There is also a clear divergence in trends
between more mature, developed economies of North America, Europe and Japan, and
developing countries, notably China, India, Southeast Asia and the Middle East. The former
tend to be characterised by lower rates of economic growth, declining shares of energyintensive industry and clear signs of saturation in energy and electricity use. These countries
already have high levels of appliance ownership and relatively little scope for further increases.
Figure 6.1 ⊳ Electricity demand by region and scenario
Latin America

2014

Africa*

Additional in 2040 in
New Policies Scenario

Middle East
E. Europe/Eurasia

End-point of range:
450 Scenario
Current Policies
Scenario

OECD Asia Oceania
Other Asia
India
OECD Europe
OECD Americas
China
2

4

6

8

10
12
Thousand TWh

Countries outside the OECD account for more than 80% of
electricity demand growth to 2040 in all scenarios
* Electricity demand in Africa in the New Policies Scenario is higher than in the Current Policies Scenario as a result of
new policies to provide greater access to electricity and more timely completion of new power plants. This increased
demand is somewhat offset in the 450 Scenario, due to efficiency gains.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

While developing countries are very diverse, they tend to exhibit faster economic growth,
industrialisation and urbanisation (IEA, 2016d), sharply rising energy and electricity demand
and, in a number of cases, a significant share of the population remaining without access

2. See Chapter 1 for a description of the scenarios.
244

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

to the modern energy services that electricity can provide. They may also have pressing
air pollution problems (IEA, 2016e), frequently linked to energy resource extraction,
production and use, and a heavy reliance on traditional use of solid biomass, again pointing
to an expectation of growth in more modern energy services, including electricity. These
trends have been clear over the last five years; OECD countries’ electricity demand has
been flat, while, outside the OECD, it rose at 5.5% per year, with most of the growth in
developing Asia.3 Electricity use in the countries outside the OECD overtook that of the
OECD in 2012.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

In the Current Policies Scenario, global electricity demand is projected to grow annually
by 2.3% to 2040, less than the pace seen since 2000, but a still considerable 80% increase
in absolute terms (Figure 6.1 and Table 6.1). Demand in developed economies grows by
around 30% or around 2 850 TWh, a little faster than since 2000. The United States and
Europe see annual growth of around 1%, below pre-recession levels, while Japan sees even
lower growth. Electricity demand growth in countries outside the OECD slows to 3.1%,
(half the rate seen since 2000), but still increases by over 13 600 TWh, to a level almost
double that of the OECD countries. China, India and Southeast Asia are all projected to see
strong growth: even though the rate of expansion in China slows to less than 3% per year,
this still results in annual electricity use more than doubling between 2014 and 2040, to
over 10 000 TWh. In India, electricity demand almost quadruples and, by 2040, approaches
the current level of demand in the United States. Annual growth slows only modestly from
recent levels of 7% towards 5% by 2040. Rapid urbanisation and electrification underpin
a large increase in power use in India’s buildings sector, to almost 1 800 TWh, with an
important contribution coming from the 8% average annual increase in electricity demand
for cooling in the residential sector. On a per-capita basis, India’s electricity use triples from
today’s level; but at 2 200 kilowatt-hours (kWh) per person, it remains low by international
standards. With power demand also rising fast across Southeast Asia, by 2040 developing
countries in Asia account for 46% of worldwide power consumption.
In the New Policies Scenario, described in detail in section 6.3, global electricity demand
is projected to rise by 13 700 TWh, 87% of this increase occurring in countries outside the
OECD. The increase in Chinese electricity demand averages 2.4% per year, only a quarter
of that seen in the last decade and just above half the rate of anticipated growth in GDP
(an important factor in altering the global relationship between GDP and power demand).
Nonetheless, China is still projected to be the source of 30% of global incremental demand
to 2040, consuming double the electricity of the next largest user, the United States (and
surpassing the per-capita use of Europe in the mid-2030s). Electricity demand in India is
projected to more than triple as population and economic growth drive up demand growth
at close to 5% annually, only marginally below the level in the Current Policies Scenario.
Electricity demand in Africa increases at 4% annually, as the economy grows and wide
ranging policies to increase access to reliable electricity bear some fruit, but annual percapita use remains below 900 kWh, even in 2040.

3. Developing Asia includes all non-OECD Asian countries.

Chapter 6 | Power sector outlook

245

6

© OECD/IEA, 2016

246

Table 6.1 ⊳ Electricity demand by region and scenario (TWh)

Current Policies

New Policies Scenario

2000

2014

OECD

8 600

9 561

Americas

4 298

4 729

3 590

3 880

United States

CAAGR
2000-2014

CAAGR
2014-2040

CAAGR
2014-2040

450 Scenario
CAAGR
2014-2040

2020

2025

2030

2035

2040

0.8%

10 040

10 372

10 707

11 048

11 388

0.7%

12 412

1.0%

10 647

0.4%

0.7%

4 948

5 100

5 279

5 471

5 697

0.7%

6 212

1.1%

5 421

0.5%

0.6%

4 027

4 109

4 211

4 317

4 452

0.5%

4 907

0.9%

4 388

0.5%

3 424

3 510

3 605

3 673

0.6%

4 069

1.0%

3 516

0.5%

1 848

1 918

1 973

2 018

0.6%

2 131

0.8%

1 709

0.0%

Europe

2 819

3 113

0.7%

3 316

Asia Oceania

1 482

1 720

1.1%

1 776

2040

2040

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

Japan

1 005

955

-0.4%

929

944

965

982

999

0.2%

1 045

0.3%

805

-0.7%

Non-OECD

4 599

10 996

6.4%

13 147

15 383

17 905

20 472

22 862

2.9%

24 625

3.1%

19 728

2.3%

E. Europe/Eurasia

1 104

1 404

1.7%

1 474

1 571

1 684

1 801

1 912

1.2%

2 014

1.4%

1 648

0.6%

677

864

1.8%

882

935

999

1 060

1 116

1.0%

1 171

1.2%

972

0.5%

Russia

2 129

7 115

9.0%

8 834

10 500

12 291

14 036

15 563

3.1%

17 073

3.4%

13 490

2.5%

China

1 174

4 982

10.9%

5 999

6 925

7 832

8 604

9 116

2.4%

10 254

2.8%

8 108

1.9%

India

376

954

6.9%

1 336

1 759

2 265

2 820

3 383

5.0%

3 579

5.2%

2 823

4.3%

Southeast Asia

322

756

6.3%

996

1 206

1 453

1 724

2 014

3.8%

2 129

4.1%

1 694

3.2%

Asia

359

828

6.1%

984

1 153

1 390

1 631

1 844

3.1%

1 972

3.4%

1 509

2.3%

Africa

385

643

3.7%

762

921

1 142

1 428

1 783

4.0%

1 670

3.7%

1 511

3.3%

Latin America

622

1 006

3.5%

1 094

1 238

1 398

1 575

1 758

2.2%

1 895

2.5%

1 571

1.7%

Middle East

Brazil
World
European Union

327

516

3.3%

555

620

694

778

864

2.0%

936

2.3%

797

1.7%

13 199

20 557

3.2%

23 186

25 755

28 612

31 521

34 250

2.0%

37 037

2.3%

30 374

1.5%

2 605

2 774

0.5%

2 929

2 997

3 038

3 087

3 112

0.4%

3 461

0.9%

3 023

0.3%

Notes: CAAGR = compound average annual growth rate. Electricity demand is defined as the total gross volume of electricity generated, less own use in the production of electricity, plus
net trade (imports less exports), less transmission and distribution losses.

In the 450 Scenario, electricity use rises at triple the pace of final energy consumption,
electricity increasing its share in final consumption as a result. However, overall power
demand growth of 48% between today and 2040 is almost 30% below the growth seen in
the New Policies Scenario: a much stronger focus on more efficient electrical equipment,
notably for electric motor systems (where savings due to energy efficiency exceed
1 600 TWh) and for major appliances and cooling systems (see Chapter 7), more than offsets
increased electrification in the transport sector. In the 450 Scenario, all sectors see lower
demand with the notable exception of transport, which expands by almost 1 600 TWh
relative to the New Policies Scenario (Figure 6.2). The United States and China together
account for more than 60% of the increase electricity use in road transport in 2040.
Figure 6.2 ⊳ Change in global electricity demand in 2040 in the

6

Thousand TWh

450 Scenario relative to the New Policies Scenario

36

32

Industry
Other

Residential
Services

28

24

New Policies
Scenario

Transport

450 Scenario

Transport is the only sector that sees higher global electricity demand
in the 450 Scenario relative to the New Policies Scenario

© OECD/IEA, 2016

In the 450 Scenario, more stringent implementation and enforcement of building codes
improves insulation and reduces the need for space heating in the buildings sector (mainly
in OECD countries), compared with today, and moderates the growth in cooling demand
(mainly outside the OECD countries). Even though more households use electricity
for space and water heating, more efficient boilers and better insulated buildings keep
electricity demand in the residential sector below that of the New Policies Scenario; this is
true for all end-uses except cooking, where improved efficiency does not offset the growth
due to higher reliance on electricity for this purpose.
There is a similar pattern in the industry sector, where increased electrification of heat
demand with heat pumps is more than compensated (by almost a factor of five) by other
efficiency gains related to electric motor systems in the 450 Scenario. As described in
Chapter 7 (section 7.4.2), there are large savings available not only from the electric motors
themselves but also from end-use devices (such as pumps, fans and air compressors),
Chapter 6 | Power sector outlook

247

the introduction of variable speed drives in variable load systems and other system-wide
measures. In addition, development of the electric process route in the steel sector – a way
to reduce coal use – is limited in practice by the availability of scrap, so globally the level of
steel produced through electric arc furnaces is similar in the two scenarios.
Overall, developing Asian economies account for almost two-thirds of the increase in
power demand in the 450 Scenario. China, by dint of vigorous implementation of efficiency
policies, contains annual electricity growth to less than 2%, with industrial power demand
some 15% lower than in the New Policies Scenario thanks to tighter standards in a range
of industries, notably steel and chemicals; residential and services sectors see even greater
reductions of around 20% (more than 700 TWh) through stricter and more wide ranging
efficiency standards. However, China’s transport sector (especially road transport), sees
major increases, rising to 830 TWh, well over double the level in the New Policies Scenario.
In absolute terms, incremental power use in India, even in this scenario, is larger than
current power use in OECD Asia Oceania, even as power use in most sectors is around
20% below that of the New Policies Scenario. Road transport sees an increase, by around
90 TWh. Electricity demand in Southeast Asia is some 16% below New Policies Scenario
levels, but still more than doubles by 2040.
By contrast, in the OECD, demand growth is contained to less than 1 100 TWh in total
(just over 10% over the Outlook period), with most regions showing low or even negative
growth (Japan). OECD industrial and residential demand in 2040 are both below 2014
levels; only the services sector shows moderate growth, and all sectors are well below
the New Policies Scenario levels. The exception is the transport sector (especially on-road)
which grows rapidly, and by 2040 is almost four-times that projected in the New Policies
Scenario (see Chapter 3.3.1).
Figure 6.3 ⊳ Global electricity generation by fuel and scenario
Coal

2014
Additional in 2040 in
New Policies Scenario

Gas and oil
Nuclear

End-point of range:
450 Scenario
Current Policies
Scenario

Hydro
Other renewables

© OECD/IEA, 2016

2

4

6

8

10

12
14
16
Thousand TWh

Coal-fired generation sees the greatest variation across scenarios

248

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

Turning to the supply mix of electricity, the varied intensity of decarbonisation policies in
the different scenarios leads to even more marked differences (Figure 6.3 and Table 6.2).
The only common denominator is the outlook for oil in power: already a minor source,
this fades to less than 1.5% of total generation in all scenarios. Gas-fired generation, which
doubled between 2000 and 2015, doubles again in the Current Policies Scenario and
increases by three-quarters in the New Policies Scenario. However, in the 450 Scenario,
gas-fired generation peaks by the late 2020s, at a level around one-quarter higher than
current levels and thereafter falls back towards current levels.
Table 6.2 ⊳ World electricity generation by source and scenario (TWh)
New Policies

450 Scenario

2014

2025

2040

2025

2040

2025

2040

Total

15 476

23 809

29 540

39 047

30 886

42 511

27 688

34 092

Fossil fuels

10 017

15 890

17 175

20 243

19 183

26 246

14 113

8 108

Coal

6 005

9 707

9 934

10 787

11 479

15 305

7 062

2 518

Gas

2 753

5 148

6 514

8 910

6 957

10 361

6 466

5 389

Oil

1 259

1 035

727

547

746

580

585

200

Nuclear

2 591

2 535

3 405

4 532

3 319

3 960

3 685

6 101

Hydro

2 619

3 894

4 887

6 230

4 817

5 984

4 994

6 891

Other renewables

250

1 489

4 074

8 041

3 567

6 320

4 896

12 992

Fossil fuels

65%

67%

58%

52%

62%

62%

51%

24%

Coal

39%

41%

34%

28%

37%

36%

26%

7%

Gas

18%

22%

22%

23%

23%

24%

23%

16%

Oil

8%

4%

2%

1%

2%

1%

2%

1%

Nuclear

17%

11%

12%

12%

11%

9%

13%

18%

Hydro

17%

16%

17%

16%

16%

14%

18%

20%

2%

6%

14%

21%

12%

15%

18%

38%

Other renewables

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Current Policies

2000

Coal-fired generation (which doubled in the 20 years to 2014, to 41% of generation) is
even more influenced by climate policies, given its higher carbon intensity. In the Current
Policies Scenario, coal generation is projected to rise by nearly 60% by 2040, but the rise is
only 11% in the New Policies Scenario. Across the three scenarios, the share of coal-fired
power in the global power mix varies from a high of 36% in the Current Policies Scenario
to a more modest 28% in the New Policies Scenario, and in the 450 Scenario to only 7%
of global generation, in absolute terms, barely a quarter of 2014 generation. Given the
importance of the power sector to steam coal demand, the implications for coal markets
are significant (see Chapter 5, Figure 5.5). What is more, 70% of coal-fired generation in
the 450 Scenario is dependent on plants equipped with carbon capture and storage (CCS),
a technology yet to be developed and deployed at scale, and dependent on supportive
policies or higher carbon prices. The share of fossil fuels in the generation mix, currently
two-thirds, is projected to decline in the Current Policies Scenario to just above 60%. In the
New Policies Scenario, the fall is faster, to just above half. However, in the 450 Scenario,
Chapter 6 | Power sector outlook

249

6

the decline in market share is dramatic, to below a quarter, with gas-fired power twice as
large as coal.
The projected decline in the share of generation from fossil-fuelled plants is matched
by the rise of low-carbon power, especially renewables. Hydropower remains the most
important contributor to low-carbon power, output increasing by more than half in all
scenarios, with the biggest increase (3 000 TWh) and highest market share (20%) occurring
in the 450 Scenario. Nuclear power output maintains a stable market share of around
11-12% in the New Policies Scenario, declines to 9% in the Current Policies, and grows to
18% in the 450 Scenario (almost two-and-a-half-times today’s levels in absolute terms).
The largest growth from any source comes from wind and solar, which are projected to
grow rapidly in all scenarios, more than doubling output by 2020 in the 450 Scenario and
showing major increases in the other scenarios. (The rise of renewable energy generation
technologies is discussed more fully in Chapters 10-12.)
Figure 6.4 ⊳ Global CO2 emissions from fossil-fuel combustion in the
Gt

power sector by scenario

20

Current Policies
Scenario

16
New Policies
Scenario

12
8
4

2000

450 Scenario
2010

2020

2030

2040

© OECD/IEA, 2016

The New Policies Scenario almost breaks the link between rising power demand and
related CO2 emissions, but the two are completely decoupled in the 450 Scenario

Global power sector CO2 emissions increased by over 7% between 2010 and 2013, (almost
1 gigatonne [Gt] in total) before stabilising in 2014 and falling in 2015, mainly on the back
of developments in China and the United States. In the Current Policies Scenario, emissions
intensity is projected to improve from 516 g CO2/kWh in 2014 to 415 g CO2/kWh in 2040,
but total CO2 emissions in the power sector are still projected to grow steadily from 13.5 Gt
to over 19 Gt by 2040. Cumulative emissions over the Outlook period total 410 Gt. In the
New Policies Scenario, the carbon intensity of the global power mix falls to 335 g CO2/kWh
and total emissions are projected to slowly grow, so 2040 emissions are projected to be
around 6% above those in 2014. Cumulative emissions total 354 Gt over the period 20152040, a relatively modest reduction of 14% from the Current Policies Scenario (Figure 6.4).
250

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

In the 450 Scenario, power sector emissions are projected to continue on their downward
path through the Outlook period, falling at an annual average rate of 5% to 3.6 Gt in 2040,
just over a quarter of 2014 emissions, or nearly 10 Gt below 2014 levels. This level of
emissions has not been seen in the power sector since the 1970s, when power output
at some 5 000 TWh, was well under one-sixth of that projected for 2040 in this scenario.
Global emissions intensity in the sector falls to less than 80 g CO2/kWh in 2040. Cumulative
emissions over the Outlook period total 230 Gt, a dramatic reduction from the other
scenarios. The power sector accounts for around 60% of the emissions avoided in this
scenario, relative to the New Policies Scenario (see Chapter 8.4.1 and Chapter 10.5) and
power sector emissions fall from more than 40% of energy-related CO2 emissions today to
less than 20% in 2040.

6

6.2.1 Accelerating the transition: power generation in the 450 Scenario
As noted, achieving the emissions trajectory required to meet the target of limiting
the rise in average global temperatures to 2 °C requires effective efforts to reduce
electricity demand, as well as large-scale deployment of all low-carbon power generation
technologies, including renewables, nuclear (in countries in which it is acceptable) and
fossil-fuel plants fitted with CCS, and reductions in output from unabated fossil-fuel power
plants (Figure 6.5). The remainder of this section explores in greater depth the implications
of the 450 Scenario for the power sector.
By 2040, 85% of global generation in the 450 Scenario is projected to come from lowcarbon sources. Renewables expand to 58% of generation, compared with 37% in the
New Policies Scenario and 23% today. Wind and solar expand to 10 500 TWh, almost a
third of generation, from 4% today: wind power capacity is projected to increase from
current levels by a factor of 5.5, to over 2 300 GW and solar PV to increase nine-times
to 2 100 GW. Nuclear output more than doubles, based on a commensurate increase in
capacity to 820 GW, with new builds in China, India, the United States, Southeast Asia, and
the Middle East, plus lifetime extensions in many other countries (see Chapter 10.5.1 for
regional breakdowns).

© OECD/IEA, 2016

The contribution of coal shrinks to only 7% of the mix by 2040, of which 70% is generated
by plants fitted with CCS, mostly in China and the United States (some 260 GW of coal-fired
capacity is CCS-equipped, compared with 10 GW in the New Policies Scenario). Output
from gas-fired power plants increases up until the late 2020s, but then falls to 16% of the
mix by 2040, with capacity factors considerably lower than in the New Policies Scenario. By
the end of the Outlook period, almost a fifth of gas-fired power comes from plants fitted
with CCS, (mostly in the United States). More than a third of total output from plants fitted
with CCS is from gas-fired plants, the balance from coal-fired units.
In the developed economies, by 2040 renewables-based capacity is projected to increase
two-and-a-half times from 2015 levels (and is a third higher than the New Policies Scenario)
to exceed 2 500 GW, with wind at over 920 GW and solar PV at 730 GW. Europe and the
Chapter 6 | Power sector outlook

251

United States are the major contributors; Europe with 380 GW of wind by 2040 and the
United States with 325 GW of solar PV. Nuclear capacity increases by over one-fifth relative
to the New Policies Scenario. By contrast, OECD coal capacity continues to fall to below 30%
of its 2010 peak and CCS is fitted to a quarter of OECD coal generating plant: well over half is
located in the United States. The impact on generation is marked: in the United States, fossilfuel power output falls to 1 100 TWh by 2040, less than a quarter of total generation. Some
85% of this is gas-fired and unabated coal generation disappears. CCS-fitted plants (both coal
and gas) account for less than 700 TWh. Wind and solar combined provide almost 40% of
electricity, up from 5% now. In the European Union, fossil-fuelled power output falls to 10%
of the total, with wind and solar rising to proportions similar to those in the United States.
Combined absolute output from these sources increases almost four-fold from today’s levels.
Nuclear, hydro and bioenergy account for almost half of generation.
Figure 6.5 ⊳ Growth in generation to 2040 by low-carbon technology
in the New Policies and 450 Scenarios
Renewables:
Additional
in 2040

2014
New Policies
450 Scenario

Additional
in 2040

2014
New Policies
450 Scenario

Additional
in 2040

2014
New Policies
450 Scenario

Wind and
solar PV
Other
renewables

Nuclear:

CCS:

4 000

8 000

12 000

16 000
TWh

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Generation from renewables more than triples in the 450 Scenario,
compared with today; nuclear and CCS also support decarbonisation

In the countries outside the OECD, wind and solar PV capacities are each projected to
increase to nearly 1 400 GW by 2040 (about half of the rise in each case being in China),
more than 55% higher than the already impressive levels reached in the New Policies
Scenario. Coal capacity in these economies continues to rise to 2020, surpassing 1 500 GW
(two-thirds of which is in China), a 57% increase since 2010. But capacity additions then
slow sharply, so that, by 2040, coal-fired capacity is at the level of 2010. China has 190 GW
of CCS-fitted coal plant by 2040, compared with only 8 GW in the New Policies Scenario.
China’s gas-fired capacity triples in both the New Policies and 450 Scenarios, gas playing
an important balancing role in the power system. Nuclear capacity in countries outside the
OECD expands significantly, from 92 GW now to over 440 GW, (50% more than the New
252

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

Policies Scenario) with China responsible for more than half of the increase and India for
one-sixth. Hydropower sees a relatively modest 14% boost over the level reached in the
New Policies Scenario.
China’s projected coal-fired power output falls from almost three-quarters of the total in
2014 to less than one-sixth by 2040, most of it coming from plants with CCS. Globally,
three-quarters of power generated from CCS-equipped coal-fired power plants is in China
(the United States and India contribute half of the balance). Even in the 450 Scenario, on
the basis of plant recently installed and plant under construction, China is set by 2020 to
have around 480 GW of high efficiency supercritical and ultra-supercritical plant, much
located close to potential storage sites, and these plants are especially good candidates
for CCS retrofit (IEA, 2016f). The relatively young age of China’s coal fleet provides a strong
incentive to develop and deploy CCS, especially over the next 20 years. Nevertheless, by
the end of the Outlook period, wind, nuclear and hydro all have a share in generation in
China bigger than coal, and wind becomes the single largest source of power. In addition,
solar technologies generate 1 150 TWh in China, (more electricity than total output in
Japan today). In India, the contrast in generation between the New Policies Scenario and
the 450 Scenario is equally stark. In the New Policies Scenario, India becomes the secondlargest producer of coal-fired power before 2025, on its way to more than doubling coal
generation by 2040. In the 450 Scenario, coal generation peaks by 2020, and by 2040 gas,
wind, hydro, and solar PV each contribute more than 500 TWh, all more than coal, which
falls to 12% of the mix, compared to three-quarters today.
Figure 6.6 ⊳ Global annual capacity additions of low-carbon technologies
GW

in the 450 Scenario

400

CCS
Nuclear
Other renewables

300

Hydro
Wind

200

Solar PV

100

2020

2025

2030

2035

2040

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Annual capacity additions of low-carbon technologies
need to exceed 350 GW per year by the 2030s
Note: Other renewables includes biomass, geothermal, concentrating solar power and marine.

Chapter 6 | Power sector outlook

253

6

With more than 350 GW in new low-carbon generation capacity required globally each
year in the 450 Scenario from the 2030s onwards (Figure 6.6), it is no surprise that this
dominates the investment requirement (see Chapter 2, Figure 2.13). By 2040, total annual
power plant investment has risen by two-thirds to around $700 billion, of which almost
three-quarters is for renewable technologies. The share devoted to fossil fuels falls from
a third to less than 15%. Coal investment falls by almost 50% in dollar terms, but the
share of this devoted to CCS rises from a very low share (in the New Policies Scenario) to
around 80%: almost all investment in coal-fired plants in the United States and China is
made in plants with CCS. Globally, about 40% of gas investment is also CCS based. Nuclear
more than doubles to $80 billion per year by 2040.
Lower projected demand in the 450 Scenario reduces spending on transmission and
distribution networks by a cumulative $850 billion (compared with over $8 trillion required
in total in the New Policies Scenario). However, the annual average spending on networks
in the 450 Scenario, having diverged for much of the Outlook period, gradually catches up
with that of the New Policies Scenario because of the increased investment required to
integrate greater shares of variable renewables into the power system (see Chapter 12).

6.3 A closer look at the New Policies Scenario
This section analyses developments in the electricity sector in the New Policies Scenario to
2040 in more detail. It covers projected electricity demand, capacity (including additions
and retirements), generation, investment and greenhouse-gas (GHG) reductions and
concludes with regional insights.

6.3.1 Electricity demand

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Electricity demand4 is strongly correlated to economic growth, although the extent of
the linkage depends on a country’s level of economic development, the structure of its
economy and the extent of access to electricity. Over the last two decades, electricity
demand globally has risen almost in tandem with GDP. But in the last few years, there
are clear signs of this relationship changing. In the New Policies Scenario, the linkage
between growth in global electricity demand and GDP continues to weaken, as efficiency
improvements and the decline of energy-intensive industry in mature economies, plus the
rise of the services sector everywhere, including in emerging economies, contribute to a
decline in electricity intensity (electricity use per dollar of GDP). Globally, industry remains
a major source of electricity demand growth (with the increase concentrated almost
entirely outside the mature economies of the OECD), but residential and services sectors
demand also rises rapidly (Figure 6.7).

4. Electricity demand is defined as total gross electricity generated, less own use in generation, plus net trade (imports
less exports), less transmission and distribution losses.
254

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

Figure 6.7 ⊳ Growth in global electricity demand by sector and electricity’s
TWh

share of sector demand in the New Policies Scenario

14 000

70%

12 000

60%

10 000

50%

8 000

40%

6 000

30%

4 000

20%

2 000

10%
Industry

Residential

Services

Transport

Electricity
consumption:
Increase to 2040
2014
Electricity demand
as share of sector
(right axis):
2040

6

Other ﬁnal
uses

Globally all end-use sectors see robust growth in electricity demand

© OECD/IEA, 2016

Today, electricity accounts for 30% of energy consumption in the buildings sector, but
due to strong growth it rises to more than 40% in 2040. The growth take place mainly in
countries outside the OECD, due to the rapid uptake of appliances and cooling systems
from today’s relatively low ownership rates: the fastest-growing non-OECD countries have
significantly less need for space heating than in developed countries, but higher needs for
space cooling (Figure 6.8). Total electricity consumption increases over time as rising living
standards encourage people to buy larger appliances, e.g. refrigerators and televisions, and
to switch from fans to air conditioners, which can consume up to ten-times more power.
Smaller appliances, e.g. vacuum cleaners, hair dryers and network devices, represent up to
half of the electricity consumption from appliances, but are not subject to energy efficiency
standards in most countries. Consequently, these types of appliances contribute to driving
up electricity demand in all major world regions, including OECD countries.
Within the mature economies of the United States, Europe and Japan, current electricity
demand trends continue in the New Policies Scenario. These include generally slow growth,
with industrial demand growth even slower, but relatively stronger growth in residential
and especially services sectors’ electricity demand. Since 2007, power demand in these
economies has been flat or declined: industry use has fallen and only the services sector
has seen modest growth. By 2010, services had emerged as the largest sector in power
demand in the United States and Japan; two decades earlier it had accounted for barely
a fifth of electricity use. In our Outlook, industry and residential demand recover slowly,
but grow at less than 0.5% per year. Power use in the services sector grows at a higher
rate, adding some 500 TWh in absolute terms, accounting for about half of total demand
growth. Overall in OECD countries, GDP is assumed to grow at 1.9% per year, but electricity
demand grows at only around one-third of that rate due to slowing population growth,
Chapter 6 | Power sector outlook

255

saturation of electricity demand in some areas, a major push on energy efficiency and
ongoing structural economic changes. Electricity use in transport, by contrast, triples to
330 TWh, accounting for around a third of the global increase in this sector. While the use
of electricity for rail transport doubles, it is the road sector that sees the biggest increase,
rising to around 140 TWh, as more electric vehicles enter service. Notwithstanding this
rapid growth, electricity provides only 3% of the OECD transport sector’s energy needs in
2040 (see Chapter 3.3.1).
Figure 6.8 ⊳ Electricity demand in buildings by equipment and region
Thousand TWh

in the New Policies Scenario

20

80%

15

60%

Non-OECD electricity
demand

40%

Share of appliances
and cooling
(right axis)

Major
Space appliances
cooling

10

Other
appliances

Other

5

OECD electricity
demand

20%

2014

2040

Countries outside the OECD account for the majority of electricity growth, due to the
increased ownership of appliances and cooling systems
Notes: Major appliances include refrigerators and freezers, cleaning machines (washing, dryers and dish washers),
televisions and computers. Other appliances cover appliances, such as vacuum cleaners, kettles and hair dryers. The
other category includes other end-uses, such as lighting, space and water heating, and cooking.

© OECD/IEA, 2016

The picture for countries outside the OECD is quite different, even though here too, there
is a significant slowing in aggregate growth in electricity demand, compared with the past.
Part of this is due to an expected slowdown in the expansion of GDP, from the 6% annually
of recent years to an average of 4.4% per year. Population growth also slows, but it is
structural economic shifts that mostly account for the reduced pace of growth in electricity
demand from 6.4% (above GDP growth) to 2.9%, well below that of GDP. Nonetheless, the
electrification of these economies continues apace; by 2040 electricity accounts for 23% of
final energy consumption, almost double the share in 2000.
Developing Asia is the driver of global demand growth in all sectors (Figure 6.9). Industrial
electricity demand growth in the countries outside the OECD slows from the 6.9% of
recent years to 2.3%, but it still increases by more than 4 300 TWh. China remains the
biggest contributor to industrial demand growth (some 1 900 TWh) while India increases
256

World Energy Outlook 2016 | Global Energy Trends

by 900 TWh. Demand from the buildings sector in China and India combined grows by
more than 3 100 TWh. Within this sector, China, India and other developing Asian
countries account for almost two-thirds of global residential demand growth, underpinned
by continued urbanisation (already today, two-thirds of final energy use in the buildings
sector is consumed in urban areas). Electricity use for cooling in buildings in India and
China grows to almost 1 200 TWh in 2040, nearly four-times today’s level. Demand in the
services sector also increases rapidly, with China and India accounting for more than 40%
of the growth outside the OECD. Developing Asia also increases transport electricity use
by 360 TWh, more than half of the global increase in this sector. Nonetheless, despite
impressive increases in many regions, power demand in the transport sector makes up less
than 3% of the world’s power use in 2040.

As we have seen, investment in new generation capacity is dominated by renewable energy
technologies: these technologies account for around 60% of the total in the next decade,
accelerating to two-thirds later in the Outlook period. In 2040, almost half of the power
plant investment of $515 billion is projected to be made in wind and solar technologies,
with a further 18% in hydro and bioenergy. The share of total investment for renewables is
highest in the OECD countries, although, in absolute terms, developing countries typically
spend about one-and-a-half times as much as developed economies on renewables-based
generation investment. Together, China and India are projected to invest $2.3 trillion
over the Outlook period in renewables, around a fifth of total global investment in power
generation. Mobilising investments on this scale is a profound challenge, with a persistent
risk that there will be under-investment in power plants and other infrastructure, with
consequent risks to the security of electricity supply, if regulatory frameworks or market
designs are flawed. This applies to renewable technologies but also to other generation
investments, the incentives for which are often diminished by rapid growth in low marginal
cost sources of power. The risks are widespread, and cover many developed markets,
especially in Europe, as well as emerging economies (see Chapter 2.6).
Chapter 6 | Power sector outlook

263
