Executive Summary
The ten countries of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) represent one of
the most dynamic parts of the global energy system, with their energy demand growing by
60% in the past 15 years. ASEAN countries are at various stages of economic development
and have different energy resource endowments and consumption patterns. But they also
share a common challenge to meet rising demand in a secure, affordable and sustainable
manner. Ensuring sufficient investment in energy supply and energy efficiency is central to
this task. These countries have made major efforts in recent years to upgrade policy
frameworks, reform fossil-fuel consumption subsidies, increase regional co-operation and
encourage greater investment in the region’s considerable renewable energy potential.
While there are many encouraging signs, much more remains to be done. Access to
modern energy is incomplete. With a total population of nearly 640 million, an estimated
65 million people remain without electricity and 250 million are reliant on solid biomass as
a cooking fuel. Investment in upstream oil and gas has been hit by lower prices since 2014
and the region faces a dwindling position as a gas exporter, and a rising dependency on
imported oil. At the same time, energy-related air pollution, both indoor and outdoor, also
presents major risks to public health, while rising carbon-dioxide (CO2) emissions are
contrary to the objectives of the Paris Climate Change Agreement, which has been ratified
by all the countries in the region. Our analysis in this World Energy Outlook (WEO) Special
Report confirms that Southeast Asian countries are looking towards a future in which
energy demand is set to grow strongly. Our aim in this analysis is to provide a framework
for understanding the region’s energy choices, examining the pitfalls and opportunities that
lie ahead and what different pathways might imply for future energy security, the
environment and economic development.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

A new heavyweight in global energy
In our main scenario, Southeast Asia’s energy demand grows by almost two-thirds in the
period to 2040. This represents one-tenth of the rise in global demand, as the region’s
economy triples in size, the total population grows by a fifth with the urban population
alone growing by over 150 million people. This scenario reflects the impact of existing
energy policies in Southeast Asia as well as an assessment of the results likely to stem from
the implementation of announced policy intentions, such as the country pledges made as
part of the Paris Agreement. There is strong growth in low-carbon energy, but increased
energy needs lead to rising consumption of all fuels. Coal alone accounts for almost 40% of
the growth, and overtakes gas in the electricity mix. Oil demand expands from 4.7 million
barrels per day (mb/d) today to around 6.6 mb/d in 2040, as rising demand for mobility
means the number of road vehicles increases by two-thirds to around 62 million. Demand
for natural gas also grows strongly, by around 60% to 2040, due to rising consumption in
power generation and industry. The share of renewables, excluding solid biomass but

Executive Summary

11

including hydro, solar photovoltaic (PV) and wind power, almost doubles as their
deployment helps to meet rising electricity demand and to extend energy access.
Electricity accounts for the largest share of the increase in final consumption, as rising
incomes in the region translate into higher ownership of appliances and increasing
demand for cooling. Two-thirds of the increase in Southeast Asia’s electricity demand
comes from the residential and services sectors, largely due to a rising urban middle class.
Industrial electricity demand more than doubles, pushed higher by the lighter industrial
branches that are a mainstay of the region’s economic activity. One area where
electrification makes less progress is the transport sector. In the absence, for the moment,
of supportive policies, electric mobility does not gain much of a foothold in our projections.
Instead, energy use in the transport sector remains dominated by oil products, with policy
efforts to diversify the mix focusing on biofuels. Biofuels can bring energy security and
environmental benefits, although that would require that palm oil production is managed
sustainably, an important policy issue for the main producers, Indonesia and Malaysia.
Meeting increasing electricity demand requires a huge expansion in the region’s power
system, with coal and renewables accounting for almost 70% of new capacity. Installed
power generation capacity rises to more than 565 gigawatts (GW) in 2040 in our main
scenario, from 240 GW today. The mix of fuels and technologies varies country-by-country,
but overall reflects an emerging preference for a combination of high efficiency coal plants
and increased deployment of renewables. By 2040, renewables account for the largest
share of installed capacity (nearly 40%), but coal takes the most prominent role in the
generation mix (40%) and 70% of the new coal-fired capacity uses high efficiency
supercritical or ultra-supercritical technologies. Output from natural gas-fired plants rises
by 60% in absolute terms, but the share of gas in the power mix falls back from the current
43% to 28% by 2040. The large penetration of renewables and wider deployment of more
efficient coal-fired plants results in the carbon intensity of power sector declining by almost
one-fifth, but it remains significantly higher than the world average.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

The route to universal access
Extending connections to those without access to electricity is a top priority for policymakers in Southeast Asia. The large number of people living in island communities and
remote areas makes the challenge more difficult. Countries across the region have made
great strides in addressing the issue, with the electrification rate rising by 28 percentage
points since 2000, and is now at 90%. The declining cost of renewables is opening new
opportunities to achieve access and reduce reliance on costly diesel generators in isolated
areas. But achieving universal access across a very diverse region requires careful
consideration of the specific situation of different communities. This WEO Special Report
includes a detailed geo-spatial analysis that considers population density and resource
availability to determine the least-cost connection type and fuel technology for the four
countries – Indonesia, Philippines, Myanmar and Cambodia – where 95% of those without
electricity are concentrated.
12

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

In our main scenario, all countries in Southeast Asia achieve universal access by the early2030s, using a wide range of fuels and technologies, as well as both centralised and
decentralised solutions. Varying resource distribution, distance from existing demand
centres and population density means that there is no one-size-fits-all approach. In
Indonesia, nearly 40% of those who gain access do so through extension of the existing
grids, with mini-grid and off-grid approaches playing a prominent role in areas of the
country, including Papua, which are more sparsely populated. The Philippines, which fulfils
its goal of universal access well before 2030, relies more heavily on grid connections that
account for around 90% of new connections, while renewables-based mini-grid and off-grid
also play a role, providing access to around 1.6 million people. In Cambodia, grid
connections are the least-cost solution for all but 3% of the 7.6 million new connections on
the path to full electrification. Myanmar has ample scope to rely on renewables in its
electrification strategy. Solar PV provides the least-cost connection to around 11.8 million
people, around half of new connections by 2030.

A reversal of fortune for net energy trade

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Southeast Asia remains an important producer of oil, gas and coal, but faces several
challenges, especially in the near term. The oil supply outlook in our main scenario
continues the recent trajectory of decline, falling from 2.5 mb/d today to 1.7 mb/d in 2040;
offsetting production declines from mature fields becomes all the more difficult in the
current period of lower prices and investment. A slight rise in production in Brunei
Darussalam and the Philippines is not enough to offset declines in Indonesia, Malaysia and
Viet Nam. Natural gas fares better, with the region as a whole successfully keeping
production at around the same level as today in the period to 2040. The production outlook
would be brighter still if investment in Indonesia’s East Natuna field were secured, though
this is contingent on finding a suitable solution for the very high levels of CO2 associated
with the field’s production. Coal production, centred in Indonesia, falls marginally, although
this reflects policy choices rather than resource constraints.
Decreasing domestic supply and increasing demand pushes Southeast Asia’s annual net
import bill to over $300 billion in 2040, equivalent to around 4% of the region’s total
gross domestic product. Oil is by far the largest tranche of projected imports; net imports
of 6.9 mb/d in 2040 require $280 billion in annual outlays by 2040. While the region as a
whole becomes a net importer of coal, Indonesia remains an important producer as well as
an exporter to its Southeast Asian neighbours and India. Southeast Asia plays an
increasingly prominent role as a market for liquefied natural gas (LNG), benefiting in the
near term from prices depressed by the strong global supply outlook. The use of LNG
extends to smaller scale projects in Indonesia and the Philippines, and plays an important
role in displacing diesel-based generation in some island communities. Apart from the
mounting import bill, the region’s increasing dependence on imported energy raises
significant energy security concerns.

Executive Summary

13

The road ahead for Southeast Asia is not set in stone
The projections in our main scenario show that Southeast Asia is on track to achieve
some key energy policy goals, including the difficult task of bringing universal electricity
access and greater diversification of the energy mix. Yet they also highlight major
potential risks. Despite the respite afforded by lower prices on oil import bills, energy
security remains high on the agenda as the impact of lower upstream spending works its
way into regional supply, while imports continue to grow. Concerns about air pollution in
several of the region’s largest cities amplify as urban populations and demand for mobility
increase. Strong growth in fossil-fuel consumption leads to a 75% increase in energyrelated CO2 emissions.
Policy choices can help mitigate these risks, and our new Sustainable Development
Scenario describes an alternative pathway for the region that meets global sustainable
development goals as well as putting the world on a trajectory consistent with the
objectives of the Paris Agreement. In this new scenario, Southeast Asia’s energy demand is
16% lower in 2040 than in the central scenario, helped by a broader adoption of more
stringent efficiency standards. The reduced demand and increased use of renewables
(around 20 percentage points higher as a share of primary energy demand versus our main
scenario) helps reduce reliance on imported oil and gas, and by 2040, the import bill is
lower by almost $180 billion. The transition in the Sustainable Development Scenario has
profound impacts on greenhouse-gas and air pollutant emissions, with energy-related CO2
emissions 50% lower than in our main scenario.
Rising energy needs and changing supply-demand dynamics are creating tough challenges
for Southeast Asia’s policy-makers, but the energy transition is also opening up new
affordable policy and technology options. Energy-efficient and low-carbon technologies
offer a way to pursue multiple objectives of energy security, affordability and
environmental goals. The rapidly declining cost of wind and solar PV provides an
opportunity to help meet growing electricity demand in a cost-effective and sustainable
manner, while also helping spur local manufacturing industries. Malaysia is already the
world’s third-largest producer of photovoltaic cells, while investment in Thailand’s solar
manufacturing industry is increasing PV output for global markets.
Our scenarios highlight three avenues that require particular attention from policymakers: investment, efficiency and regional co-operation and integration:

© OECD/IEA, 2017



14

Adequate energy investment: Southeast Asia’s cumulative energy investment
requirement (in energy supply and efficiency) to 2040 is estimated at $2.7 trillion in
our main scenario. It is slightly higher in the Sustainable Development Scenario at
$2.9 trillion, although greater attention to energy efficiency in this scenario reduces
the call for new supply infrastructure. In either case, mobilising investment on this
scale will require significant participation from the private sector and international
financial institutions. Attracting investment will be contingent on the incentives
available to investors, which may be dampened by the presence of electricity price
World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

© OECD/IEA, 2017

controls or fossil-fuel consumption subsidies, or terms that are unfavourable
compared with other investment opportunities worldwide. There is also a strategic
choice to be made regarding the direction of investment flows. Realising the
Sustainable Development Scenario requires a major shift towards low-carbon options
and efficiency, with the savings in energy consumption and the lower fossil-fuel import
bill more than offsetting the increased investment.


More efficient energy use: Efficiency policies in place or under consideration today
can curtail energy demand in end-use sectors in Southeast Asia by 10% by 2040, but
this far from exhausts the potential gains. For instance, the limited adoption of fueleconomy standards for passenger vehicles means that average fuel economy in the
region is projected to be 20% worse than the global average in 2040 in our main
scenario. With growing economies and expanded road infrastructure, freight activity
more than doubles by 2040 and fuel consumption by trucks (less than 15% of road
transport fuel use today) accounts for around 40% of transport energy demand growth
to 2040. Rising electricity demand means that reform of electricity subsidies, which are
prevalent in some countries in Southeast Asia, becomes imperative in order to prevent
wasteful consumption, incentivise investments in efficiency and avoid a drain on fiscal
resources. National budgets would face a cumulative electricity subsidy bill of more
than $350 billion over the period to 2040 if they fail to achieve the subsidy reforms
anticipated in our main scenario.



More integrated gas and electricity markets: Better interconnection of natural gas
supply networks, underpinned by harmonised regulation towards flexible and
transparent markets, can enhance gas security in the region. In the power sector,
realising the long-planned regional grid would make large-scale renewables-based
projects more viable. It would also provide benefits to the power system as a whole,
aiding the integration of rising shares of wind and solar power.

Executive Summary

15

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Chapter 1
Energy in Southeast Asia today
A rising force in global energy
H i g h l i g ht s

 Southeast Asia is increasingly influential on the global energy stage. The ten member
countries of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) collectively are the
world’s seventh-largest economy and the fifth-largest destination for foreign
investment in 2016. Strong economic growth has fuelled a 70% increase in energy
demand since 2000, and the region now accounts for 5% of total global demand.

 There are major differences in energy use patterns across Southeast Asia, with
Indonesia accounting for over 35% of the region’s total energy demand. Overall,
fossil fuels supply around three-quarters of the region’s energy mix, with oil taking
the largest share (34%), followed by gas (22%) and then coal (17%). Use of solid
biomass for cooking is widespread, but accounts for a decreasing share of primary
energy use. Hydropower has grown rapidly and the deployment of solar PV and
wind is also starting to pick up, albeit from a low base in most countries.

 The potential for renewable energy is abundant and widely distributed, but fossil
fuels are concentrated in a few countries, with Indonesia, Malaysia and Viet Nam
having the largest resources. Southeast Asia’s oil production has been in decline for
over a decade and stood at 2.5 mb/d in 2016. The region also accounts for 6% of
global gas output and 7% of worldwide coal production. Southeast Asia is a net
exporter of energy, as exports of coal, natural gas and bioenergy (mainly biofuels)
more than offset net imports of oil in energy-equivalent terms.

 Many ASEAN countries are taking concerted steps to address energy security and
environmental concerns. Reform efforts and lower international fuel prices have cut
the cost of fossil-fuel consumption subsidies by more than half over the last five
years, to $17 billion in 2015. Government action has underpinned a two-thirds
reduction in the number of people lacking access to electricity since 2000, to
65 million. Policy attention in many countries aims to improve energy efficiency and
to speed the deployment of renewables, to address pressing problems with local
pollution and emissions.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

 Future energy trends in Southeast Asia will be largely determined by the interplay of
government policies and key energy, economic, environmental and demographic
indicators. We assume that the region’s economy triples in size by 2040, by which
time it is comparable to that of China’s today, while its population increases by 20%
to over 760 million. The respite afforded to countries by the fall in the price of oil
since 2014 ebbs as the price rises gradually in our main scenario, accompanied by
more modest increases in the anticipated prices for natural gas and coal.

Chapter 1 | Energy in Southeast Asia today

17

1.1

Introduction

Southeast Asia Energy Outlook, a World Energy Outlook Special Report, has been published
every other year since 2013. It provides in-depth analyses of the energy demand and supply
prospects of the countries that make up the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN). Ten countries are members of ASEAN – Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic (PDR), Malaysia, Myanmar, Philippines, Singapore,
Thailand and Viet Nam – which are at different stages in their economic development, but
which are all experiencing rapid economic and demographic change. Individually and
collectively, the countries of Southeast Asia are increasingly influential on the global stage.
The region’s economy has grown robustly, at an average of 5.2% per year since 2000, and
has increasingly attracted foreign direct investment, averaging $120 billion per year over
the last five years, a record comparable to China (around $130 billion) and significantly
higher than India (around $35 billion). Southeast Asia has been experiencing rapid
urbanisation and population growth, and its estimated 640 million inhabitants in 2016
represented around 9% of the world total. Its burgeoning economy and population has
resulted in a significant increase in primary energy demand, which has grown by around
70% since 2000.
Changes in total primary energy demand per capita

Figure 1.1 ⊳

in Southeast Asia
GDP per cap. ($2016 thousand, PPP)

100
Singapore

80

Cambodia

2015
2000

Brunei Darussalam

60 Myanmar

Philippines
Viet Nam

40

Indonesia
ASEAN

20

OECD

Malaysia
Thailand
World

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Total primary energy demand per capita (toe)
Energy demand in Southeast Asia has grown rapidly since 2000,
although regional averages mask a wide range of country circumstances

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Note: PPP = purchasing power parity; toe = tonnes of oil equivalent.

Trends at the regional level mask wide disparities in circumstances and energy trends
across the member countries of ASEAN (see section 1.3.1). Taken together, average percapita energy demand in Southeast Asia grew by around 20% over the past decade and has
now reached around half of the world average, suggesting great scope for future growth in
18

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

energy demand. However, the range is significant: some ASEAN members, albeit those with
relatively small populations such as Singapore and Brunei Darussalam, have per-capita
energy demand that is more than twice the world average, while that of Myanmar is just
one-fifth of the world average (Figure 1.1). The region has considerable fossil and
renewable energy resources, but around 65 million people still lack access to electricity.
This report provides updated analyses of a region experiencing vibrant economic and
demographic change. It describes a changing energy landscape and examines how policies
in place and under consideration might continue to re-shape this landscape over the period
to 2040. Although it looks to the future, this outlook does not make predictions, but instead
provides a framework within which to assess Southeast Asia’s own policy choices and the
direction that they imply for the region’s energy system. Some of the trends described will
be welcome; but others may raise concerns about their implications for energy security,
economic development or environmental sustainability. We hope that this analysis will
help policy-makers, industry, investors and other stakeholders address the myriad
opportunities and challenges that lie ahead.

1.2

Key energy trends in Southeast Asia

1.2.1

Energy demand

Primary energy demand
Primary energy demand in Southeast Asia grew by around 70% between 2000 and 2016, to
around 640 million tonnes of oil equivalent (Mtoe), while its gross domestic product (GDP)
more than doubled over the same period. Rising incomes, urbanisation, expanded access to
energy and growing populations all contributed to strong energy demand growth. Fossil
fuels dominate the primary energy mix, accounting for almost 75% of the total in 2016
(Figure 1.2). Among ASEAN members, Indonesia has the highest energy demand,
accounting for over 35% of the region’s total, followed by Thailand.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Oil continues to be the dominant source of energy, though its share of total primary energy
demand has declined by around six percentage points, to 34%, since 2000. Oil demand
grew by around 40% over this period, as increasing wealth and relatively weak public
transport infrastructure translated into an almost doubling of the number of passenger
vehicles to 56 vehicles per 1 000 people in 2016. Nonetheless, this level of ownership is still
less than half of the world average, signalling the potential for further growth. Demand for
mobility, which today is heavily correlated with consumption of oil products, is likely to
remain one of the main underlying drivers of energy demand growth.
Coal demand has more than tripled since 2000, with an annual average growth rate of 8.8%.
In 2016, coal demand of around 110 Mtoe accounted for 17% of the total primary energy
demand, of which the largest portion was for power generation. Abundant coal resources
in the Southeast Asia region, as well as its relatively low cost, have underpinned the rise in
coal demand, alongside the policy imperatives to meet rising demand for electricity and
extend access to electricity to the millions of people that lack it. Natural gas consumption
Chapter 1 | Energy in Southeast Asia today

19

1

also grew rapidly, almost doubling since 2000, with use in power generation accounting for
around 60% and industrial demand accounting for the bulk of the rest.
Solid biomass plays a major role in Southeast Asia’s primary energy mix, accounting for 20%
of total demand in 2016. A variety of biomass, such as fuelwood, charcoal and agricultural
waste is used as a source of energy, mainly in the residential sector, where it is relied on by
around 250 million people as a source of heat for cooking. Though still high, the share of
bioenergy in the mix has been in decline (it was about 26% in 2000); this reflects the
ongoing shift towards modern energy such as electricity (for lighting) and liquefied
petroleum gas (LPG) (for cooking).
Among the modern sources of renewable energy, hydropower has grown rapidly with
expanded use in Cambodia, Myanmar and Lao PDR. So far, non-hydro renewables have
played only a relatively limited role in the energy mix. To address environmental concerns,
as well as to make better use of abundant renewable resources, many countries in
Southeast Asia have plans to expand the use of wind and solar power (and geothermal in
some areas). Currently there is no nuclear power capacity in the region, though there are
plans in some countries to introduce it to meet growing electricity demand.
Evolution of primary energy demand in Southeast Asia

Figure 1.2 ⊳

2016

2000

6%

Coal

6% 8%

Oil
26%
385 Mtoe

19%

20%

Gas
41%

18%

643 Mtoe

Bioenergy
Other renewables

22%

34%

Primary energy demand has increased by around 70% since 2000,
with coal accounting for the largest share of the growth

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Sectoral demand
Industry has increased its energy use by almost 70% since 2000 and it is the largest
consumer among the energy end-use sectors (Figure 1.3).1 Rapid economic development
has spurred demand in a range of energy-intensive industries including steel,
petrochemicals, paper, cement and aluminium. Energy demand in each of the subsectors of
1

Industry energy demand includes blast furnace, coke ovens and petrochemical feedstocks.

20

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

iron and steel, chemicals and cement has doubled over the period, while energy demand in
paper production has grown by more than half. Energy demand for aluminium production
has increased almost five-fold, albeit from a low base. Growth in industrial energy demand
since 2000 was met primarily by coal, gas and electricity. Demand for electricity more than
doubled. Demand for oil for energy purposes decreased by 8%, but oil demand for
petrochemical feedstocks more than doubled, leading to total oil demand in industry
increasing by around 40%.
Among end-use sectors, energy demand in transport grew most rapidly, almost doubling
between 2000 and 2016. The region’s passenger vehicle stock has more than doubled since
2000, to around 36 million. These vehicles are dominantly fuelled by oil, while natural gas
and biofuels constitute around 6% of transport energy demand, collectively, reflecting
efforts made by some Southeast Asian countries such as Thailand, Malaysia, and Indonesia
to increase the use of alternative fuels. Electric vehicles have yet to feature prominently in
the region: the total electric vehicle stock is estimated at around 7 000 as of 2016, including
two/three-wheelers, much lower than the level of other regional groupings such as the
European Union (over 5 million).

Mtoe

Figure 1.3 ⊳

Energy demand by fuel and sector in Southeast Asia

200

Bioenergy
Electricity

160

Gas
Oil

120

Coal

80
40

2000 2016
Transport

2000 2016
Industry

2000 2016
Buildings

Industry has led energy demand growth among the end-use sectors since 2000, overtaking
buildings to become the largest end-use consumer

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Note: Bioenergy in the buildings sector includes the demand for traditional biomass, which accounted for
around 70 Mtoe in 2000 and around 90 Mtoe in 2016.

Bioenergy is the dominant fuel in the buildings sector, meeting around 60% of energy
demand.2 Lack of access to clean cooking facilities means that various biomass sources,
including firewood, charcoal and agricultural wastes are still prominent in the mix. Since
2000, a 180% increase in electricity consumption (the fastest growing energy source in
2

The buildings sector includes energy used in residential, commercial and institutional buildings, and nonspecified other.

Chapter 1 | Energy in Southeast Asia today

21

1

buildings over the period) has helped slow the growth in biomass use, doubling the share of
electricity in the buildings energy mix. The growth in electricity demand reflects
government policy to extend electricity access in a number of countries, particularly
Indonesia, but also the impact of urbanisation and improved living standards. Despite
efforts to provide universal access, an estimated 65 million people remain without
electricity across Southeast Asia; filling this gap is a major policy priority, examined in detail
in Chapter 3. In the buildings sector, oil consumption is mostly in the form of LPG, an
important facilitator to access clean cooking for households.

1.2.2

Electricity

Electricity demand and supply
Rapid economic and population growth pushed up electricity demand in Southeast Asia at
an annual average rate of 6.1% since 2000, twice the world average. The demand roughly
tripled over this period so per-capita electricity consumption grew robustly, with
consumption in some ASEAN members such as Cambodia, Indonesia, Myanmar and Viet
Nam more than doubling, albeit from a low base in Cambodia and Myanmar (Figure 1.4).
Electricity has been the fastest growing energy source in the region since 2000, but its
share in total final energy consumption remains relatively low at 16% in 2016 (compared
with the world average of 19%). Electricity demand in industry, the largest end-user,
accounted for 40% of the growth between 2000 and 2016. Electricity demand in the
residential sector, the second-largest electricity consuming sector, grew rapidly at an
average annual growth rate of 7.5%, underpinned by increasing ownership of appliances
(household ownership of refrigerators has increased from around 40% in 2000 to around
60% in 2016) and by increasing energy access.
Figure 1.4 ⊳

Average annual growth in per-capita electricity consumption
in Southeast Asia, 2000-2015

Per-capita electricity consumption
growth

18%

Cambodia

14%
Viet Nam

10%

Myanmar
ASEAN

6%

World

OECD

-2%
-1%

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Malaysia

Brunei
2% Darussalam

0%

1%

2%

Indonesia
Thailand

Philippines
Singapore

3%

4%

5%

6%

7%

8%

9%

10%

Per-capita GDP growth
Growth in per-capita electricity consumption was well above the global average
in most Southeast Asian countries, driven by strong economic growth

22

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

Installed power generation capacity in Southeast Asia has more than doubled since 2000,
to around 240 gigawatts (GW) in 2016. Net capacity additions over the period were
primarily coal- and gas-fired power plants, each accounting for around 40% of the increase.
There are some signs that the rapid rise in coal-fired capacity, which more than tripled
since 2000, is running out of steam: final investment decisions taken on new coal plants in
Southeast Asia (except Indonesia) fell in 2016 for a third year in a row (Figure 1.5). Such
decisions can fluctuate from year-to-year for various reasons, including the availability of
personnel to build plants, so are not entirely reliable as an indicator of future trends.
Nonetheless, the recent slowdown is symptomatic of the challenges facing the large-scale
deployment of new coal-fired power plants, including the need to address environmental
concerns and to secure financing.

GW

Figure 1.5 ⊳

Investment decisions taken for new coal-fired power generation
capacity in Southeast Asia

12

Indonesia

10

Other
Southeast Asia

8
6
4
2

2000

2005

2010

2016

Investment decisions to build new coal-fired power capacity in Southeast Asia
(except Indonesia) have been on a declining trend since 2014

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Source: Calculations for final investment decisions are based on data from McCoy Power Reports (2017)

Renewables-based power generation capacity has tripled since 2000, to 56 GW in 2016, led
by a 25 GW expansion of hydropower. Non-hydro renewables accounted for 6.5% of total
installed electricity capacity in 2016, of which bioenergy and geothermal capacity made up
around 70%. Reflecting policy efforts to deploy renewables, solar and wind capacity
increased by more than ten-fold over the past five years, albeit from a low base. Despite
the increase in electricity capacity, a shortage of electricity supply remains a significant
issue for some Southeast Asian countries. For example, according to the World Bank
Enterprise Survey, 95% of manufacturing firms in Myanmar experience electricity outages,
a level far in excess of the global average of around 60% (World Bank, 2017).
In line with the increase in capacity, power generation in Southeast Asia also more than
doubled between 2000 and 2016 (Figure 1.6). Fossil fuels continue to dominate the
Chapter 1 | Energy in Southeast Asia today

23

1

generation mix with their more than 80% share remaining unchanged over the period.
However, the shares of the various fuels have changed significantly, with coal-fired
generation growing at an annual average rate of 9.8% and increasing its share in the mix to
around one-third in 2016, from one-fifth in 2000. In an effort to mitigate some of the
environmental concerns associated with coal-fired generation, some countries led by
Indonesia, Thailand and the Philippines are prioritising more efficient coal-fired power
generation in new construction, such as supercritical plant technology.

TWh

Figure 1.6 ⊳

Power generation mix in Southeast Asia

1 000

100%

800

80%

600

60%

400

40%

200

20%

2000
Coal

2005
Oil

Gas

2010

2016

Hydropower

2000
Bioenergy

2016

Other renewables

Electricity generation has more than doubled since 2000, with coal taking a rising share
Note: TWh = terawatt-hours.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Natural gas also remains a key input for power generation, accounting for around 40%
since 2000. Individual countries have seen more dramatic changes, sometimes bucking the
regional trend. For example, in Malaysia, the share of gas in the power mix decreased from
67% in 2005 to 47% in 2015, led by policies to switch to coal in response to declining
domestic gas production. The share of gas in Viet Nam’s power generation mix also
declined, from 42% in 2005 to 33% in 2015, as the share of coal increased from 23% to 30%.
On the other hand, in Indonesia, the share of gas increased to 26% in 2015 from 15% in
2005, as the country took advantage of domestic gas production to meet rising demand. In
Myanmar, a steep increase in the share of gas-fired power generation, from 15% in 2005 to
39% in 2015, reflects a push to take advantage of its abundant domestic resources.
Oil has gradually been replaced by gas and coal in power generation, and has seen its share
in the power mix fall from about 20% in 2000 to just 4% in 2016. This trend of less oil in
power generation holds in many of the ASEAN members’ economies, as in other parts of
the world, but diesel continues to play an important role in electricity supply in many
remote islands and settlements (see Chapter 3).

24

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

Among renewables, hydro was the biggest contributor to power generation, more than
doubling the capacity since 2000, to 14% in 2016. While a significant amount of the region’s
hydropower resources remain untapped, particularly in Cambodia, Lao PDR and Myanmar,
these are increasingly being developed to meet local demand and for export. Hydropower
dominates the power mix in Cambodia and Myanmar, with a share of around 50% and 60%
in 2015, respectively. The four countries in the Lower Mekong Basin, namely Lao PDR,
Thailand, Cambodia and Myanmar, have significant hydropower potential of more than
110 GW (ACE, 2017), but the development of large-scale projects raises a plethora of social
and environmental questions that could stymie expansion.
Power generation from other renewable sources also has been increasing, with variations
from country to country linked to policy choices and resource availability. As of 2015, the
Philippines and Indonesia had the world’s second- and third-largest geothermal power
generation. In Malaysia and Thailand, bioenergy constitutes a major source of non-hydro
generation. Many countries in Southeast Asia plan to increase the use of renewables to
take advantage of their abundant resources and to address growing local air pollution and
environmental concerns, and have already introduced various support measures. Five
ASEAN members (Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand, Philippines and Viet Nam) have introduced
feed-in tariffs to incentivise investment in renewables. Such measures have helped
solar photovoltaic (PV) capacity in Thailand more than triple since 2013, to 2.8 GW in 2016.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Today nuclear power does not feature in Southeast Asia’s energy mix, though a number of
countries are considering it as an option. Thailand includes 2 GW of nuclear power capacity
by 2036 in its national power development plan. Viet Nam also makes provision for its
introduction by 2030 in its power development plan (though the plan is currently
suspended). Malaysia and Indonesia recognise nuclear power as an energy option in their
national plans, though there is no quantitative target or specific plan to introduce it.
Malaysia, Thailand, Indonesia, Philippines and Viet Nam have been engaged in nuclear
power capacity-building activities such as raising public awareness and ensuring safety in
co-operation with the International Atomic Energy Agency.
Countries across Southeast Asia, including Malaysia, Indonesia, Thailand and Viet Nam,
have taken steps to increase private sector participation in the power sector, including by
facilitating entry of independent power producers (IPPs), with the use of power purchasing
agreements. This is a departure from the long-held model of concentrating on large
national power companies. Use of power generation from IPPs complements that from
state-owned power generation companies and contributes to enhancing reliability of
electricity supply, which is one of the key elements to attract industries and foster
economic development. In 2016 in Thailand, for example, IPPs account for around 36% of
electricity generation capacity (EPPO, 2016). In addition, small power producers (SPPs),
which are distributed power generators using renewables or cogeneration technologies,
certified by the government of Thailand, can sell the electricity directly to industrial
customers and play a significant role in boosting reliability of supply (Box 1.1).

Chapter 1 | Energy in Southeast Asia today

25

1

Box 1.1 ⊳

Distributed generation to power manufacturing industries

In many Southeast Asian countries, manufacturing industries play a prominent role in
attracting foreign direct investment and boosting economic growth. Between 2000 and
2015, total manufacturing value added in the region almost doubled, to around
$550 billion, a pace faster than the global average (World Bank, 2016), with many
Southeast Asian countries having a share of manufacturing value added in GDP of more
than 20%. Growth in the region’s automotive sector is notable, with production more
than doubling to over 4 million vehicles between 2006 and 2016 (ASEAN Automotive
Federation, 2017). Thailand, with the largest share of manufacturing value added per
GDP of 27% in 2015, is the largest automobile producer among the ASEAN member
countries and has attracted many global industries including automobile assemblers
and parts manufacturers. The electronics industry is also flourishing, with many
multinational companies having manufacturing bases in Southeast Asia. Thailand alone
has 2 300 electric appliance assembly companies (ASEAN, 2017).

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Reliable, affordable electricity supply is a key element to attract foreign direct
investment and manufacturing industries to the region. Rising electricity demand,
coupled with the lack of sufficient financial resources to ensure adequate power
infrastructure, can provoke unplanned electricity outages that disrupt operations and
create losses for manufacturing industries. These concerns apply in many of the
Southeast Asian economies (Figure 1.7). Electricity loss in transmission and distribution
is higher than the global average of 8.9% in Indonesia, Myanmar and the Philippines,
leaving room for electricity cost reduction by refurbishing existing and building new
networks.
Distributed power generation can play a substantial role in ensuring reliable electricity
supply to industry. It allows industries to bypass the national grids, as well as reinforcing
those grids when electricity surplus to needs is supplied to the network. Some
Southeast Asian countries offer programmes to promote the use of distributed power
generation facilities to cope with potential supply deficiencies. For example, in
Thailand, the Small Power Producer Programme (SPP) guarantees the purchase of
power supplied from distributed generation by cogeneration technologies or non-fossil
fuel resources with capacity up to 90 megawatts (MW). Owners can sell electricity
directly to industry. The programme has proven successful in reinforcing the national
electricity system, with power generation capacity in the SPP programme accounting
for 15% (6.3 GW) of total installed capacity in 2016 (EPPO, 2016). Natural gas
cogeneration facilities accounted for around 70% of the capacity in the SPP programme
in 2016 (EGAT, 2016). Much of this capacity is situated in Thailand’s industrial zones,
where foreign manufacturing companies are concentrated, to provide reliable
electricity supply and heat under the SPP programme. The SPP also promotes the
efficient use of energy and contributes to the deployment of low-carbon energy
technologies. Renewables-based power generation in the SPP mainly use biomass such
as bagasse and sugarcane.
26

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

Thailand’s experience with the SPP programme provides a useful reference to the many
other Southeast Asian countries with financial constraints that limit their ability to keep
pace with increasing electricity demand. Such an approach requires effective regulatory
frameworks that allow the private sector to sell electricity directly to industrial
customers. In Indonesia, the government plans to set up 13 industrial parks outside of
Java to foster industrial development, of which ten are located in provinces where
diesel-fired plants are the dominant source of power supplemented with only a small
amount of renewables, such as mini-hydro and biomass. The promotion of distributed
power using renewables or gas cogeneration can offer multiple benefits: they would
allow Indonesia to tap abundant energy resource and efficiency potentials; reduce
electricity cost by replacing costly diesel generation and bring the co-benefit of
improved air quality; and would reinforce the national grid by providing a supply of
reliable electricity. The development of industrial zones in remote areas outside of Java
can benefit local people by helping to improve the economic viability of electricity
access projects, bringing electricity earlier to remote areas.
Figure 1.7 ⊳

Firms experiencing power outages and transmission and
distribution losses in selected Southeast Asian countries

100%

20%

80%

16%

60%

12%

40%

8%

20%

4%

Myanmar Indonesia Viet Nam Thailand

Share of firms
experiencing
power outages
T&D losses
(right axis)

Malaysia Philippines

Electrical outages and network losses can hinder
industrial productivity and development
Notes: T&D = transmission and distribution. For the percentage of firms experiencing electrical outages,
data for Myanmar and Thailand are from 2016 and the other countries the data are from 2015. T&D
losses are data from 2015.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Sources: World Bank (2017); IEA analysis.

The degree of private participation in power generation varies among Southeast Asian
countries depending on the allowable competition in its power market structure. In
Indonesia, around 20% of power generation capacity currently comes from IPPs, with their
role expected to expand under the General Plan for National Electricity to 2034. Viet Nam
also intends to increase the role of the private sector in electricity supply and has prepared
Chapter 1 | Energy in Southeast Asia today

27

1

the necessary regulatory framework to allow IPPs to provide electricity to EVN, the national
electricity utility. On the other hand, Singapore does not have a national power generation
company.
Transmission and distribution (T&D) networks have also been expanding rapidly in
Southeast Asia, increasing by around 70% since 2000 to around 3.6 million kilometres (km)
today. This rate of expansion is twice the world average. However, many parts of the
network need to be modernised to reduce T&D losses, which averaged 8% across the
region in 2016, compared with 7% in the OECD and 9% globally. Losses vary by country,
from 17% in Myanmar to 6% in Thailand, with rates in more than half of the ten ASEAN
members exceeding the average of Organisation of Economic Development and
Co-operation (OECD) countries.

1.2.3

Production and trade

Southeast Asia’s energy resources are varied and abundant (Figure 1.8). The region is a
significant net energy exporter; coal, natural gas and bioenergy (mainly biofuels) exports
more than offset net imports of oil in energy-equivalent terms.3 The region’s energy
resources are unevenly distributed, with Indonesia and Malaysia accounting for the
majority of the hydrocarbon resource base and production. Moreover, the resources are
often located far from demand centres or separated from them by bodies of water. Despite
Southeast Asia being a net energy exporter, many of the individual countries import
increasing amounts of oil, natural gas, coal and electricity from within and/or outside the
region.

Mtoe

Figure 1.8 ⊳

Total energy production in Southeast Asia by source

800

Other renewables
Bioenergy
Geothermal
Hydropower
Gas
Oil
Coal
Total primary
energy demand

600

400

200

2000

2005

2010

2016

Coal accounts for around 40% of Southeast Asia’s primary energy production
© OECD/IEA, 2017

and underpins the region’s role as a net energy exporter
3

Bioenergy refers to the energy content in solid, liquid and gaseous products derived from biomass
feedstocks and biogas. This includes biofuels for transport and products (e.g. wood chips, pellets and black
liquor) to produce electricity and heat. Municipal solid waste and industrial waste are also included.

28

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

Oil
Southeast Asia’s oil production has fallen from 2.9 million barrels per day (mb/d) in 2003 to
2.5 mb/d in 2016. This trend is due to Indonesia, the region’s largest producer, where
production has fallen by almost 40% since 2000, as investment lagged behind what is
needed to stem declines from existing fields. Although Indonesian production trended
higher in 2016 (increasing to around 880 thousand barrels per day (kb/d), the first year-onyear increase in six years) due to new output from the Banyu Urip field, in general the
country is a mature oil producer where it is proving difficult to discover and develop
resources, especially in today’s lower price environment. Proven reserves in Indonesia, i.e.
the amount of oil that is discovered and ready to produce, has also fallen, from 5.1 billion
barrels in 2001 to 3.3 billion barrels by end-2016. The decline in output in Indonesia,
coupled with a strong increase in demand, means that it has been a net importer of oil
since 2004, with net imports of around 700 kb/d in 2016.
Malaysia, Southeast Asia’s second-largest oil producer (and the only country in the region
apart from Brunei Darussalam that remains a net oil exporter) has successfully maintained
output at around 700 kb/d over the period since 2000. It has been less successful, however,
at booking new reserves, which have fallen by 20% since 2000, to 3.6 billion barrels by end2016 (implying a reserves to production ratio of a little over 14 years). Oil production in
Thailand grew more than in any other country in the region since 2000, by around
270 kb/d, but this was not enough to offset increasing demand. Overall, Southeast Asia’s
net import requirement increased five-fold between 2000 and 2015, to 3.5 mb/d.
While Southeast Asia is a mature oil-producing region, there is still potential to boost
output, as there remain relatively unexplored areas that are thought to hold significant
resources, particularly in deepwater. However, in some parts of the region, efforts to
increase production are constrained by challenging legal and resource ownership issues,
infrastructure constraints and the difficulties caused by the sector-wide decrease in capital
expenditure in the current market conditions.
Southeast Asia has gone from being self-sufficient in oil products in 2000 to being a net
importer of 1.3 mb/d in 2016 (including bunker fuel).4 This is the result of a combination of
strong demand growth of 2.4 mb/d, coupled with only a modest increase in refinery
capacity of 0.2 mb/d. Oil product demand stood at 6 mb/d in 2016, increasing more than
60% since 2000, primarily on increasing demand for gasoline. Many projects have been
proposed to expand the region’s refining capacity from the current level of 4.8 mb/d, but a
range of investment bottlenecks mean that few have led to a final investment decision.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Lagging capacity additions is not the only challenge that Southeast Asia’s refining sector
faces. Globally, there is a trend towards more stringent fuel quality specifications,
4

The World Energy Outlook methodology typically excludes bunkers from regional demand analysis, as they
do not count as domestic demand. However, Southeast Asia has a high share of bunkers in its total demand
relative to other regions due to its significant marine and air transportation hubs. Therefore, an estimate of
future bunker demand was added to our demand projections.

Chapter 1 | Energy in Southeast Asia today

29

1

especially regarding sulfur content. The Euro V (and more stringent Euro VI) standards are
increasingly being adopted across the globe and some Asian countries such as China and
India introduced specifications similar to the Euro standards. However, most existing oil
refineries in Southeast Asia have relatively limited upgrading and desulfurisation capacity.
The desulfurisation capacity of the region’s refining capacity relative to its primary
distillation capacity is currently around 40%, lower than the global average of 51%. The
upgrading capacity ratio is also low, at around 29%, well below the global average of 49%.5
While diesel and gasoline sulfur standards are relatively lax compared with other parts of
the world, some countries in Southeast Asia are tightening their standards. Singapore, for
example, adopted the Euro V-equivalent diesel specifications in 2014, which requires sulfur
content of below 10 parts per million (ppm) and Malaysia plans to adopt Euro V standard
by 2020.

Natural gas
Indonesia and Malaysia are Southeast Asia’s main players in natural gas, accounting for
around 70% of the region’s 8.1 trillion cubic metres (tcm) of proven reserves and two-thirds
of its 220 billion cubic metres (bcm) of production in 2016. Both countries are also major
exporters of gas, primarily in the form of liquefied natural gas (LNG), along with two other,
smaller gas exporters, Myanmar and Brunei Darussalam.6 Thailand and Singapore are the
region’s main gas importers, with imports of 16 bcm and 12 bcm respectively in 2016
(Figure 1.9). The Philippines and Viet Nam are currently self-sufficient in gas, but they will
soon start importing LNG as their demand increases at a quicker pace than domestic
production. The Philippines has plans for a regasification facility that it expects to complete
by 2020, and Viet Nam has two in advanced planning stages with first gas scheduled to be
received around 2020. Singapore is also expanding its existing LNG importing facility and is
seeking to become a major LNG trading hub (as are Shanghai and Tokyo). Singapore’s
relatively small import needs raise questions about how quickly the hub would reach
sufficient liquidity to operate efficiently, but it is nonetheless well placed to bring Asian LNG
buyers and sellers together and has taken a major step forward with the creation of an LNG
price index (the “SLiNG”) (see Spotlight in Chapter 3).
The increasing development of LNG regasification terminals in Southeast Asia is linked to
the limited intra-regional pipeline infrastructure and a desire for flexibility in gas
procurement. Although there are ambitious plans to develop an ASEAN natural gas grid,
current pipeline connections are quite limited: gas trade by pipeline in the broader region
consists of Indonesia and Malaysia exporting gas to Singapore, and Myanmar exporting gas
to Thailand and China (See Chapter 2).
5

© OECD/IEA, 2017

The upgrading capacity ratio refers to the ratio of conversion capacity such as coking, visbreaking,
hydrocracking, residue hydrocracking, fluid catalytic cracking and residue fluid catalytic cracking relative to
atmospheric distillation capacity.
6

Although exports are smaller in volume terms than in Indonesia and Malaysia, Myanmar and Brunei
Darussalam actually export a larger share of their total production. In 2015, Myanmar exported some 90% of
its production with Thailand and China being the main outlets. Brunei Darussalam currently ships some twothirds of its production abroad.

30

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

Figure 1.9 ⊳

Natural gas production, exports and consumption in selected
Southeast Asian countries, 2016
Domestic
use

Indonesia
Malaysia

Exports

Thailand
Myanmar
Viet Nam
Brunei Darussalam
Philippines
0

20

40

60

80
bcm

Southeast Asia remains a net exporter of natural gas,
but growth in domestic demand is outpacing that of production

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Southeast Asia’s gas market development has been held back by lack of infrastructure, slow
progress in market reform and sluggish production growth. Myanmar is a case in point:
despite a relative abundance of gas resources, delays in ramping up production, together
with long-term contracts that require it to sell the vast majority of its output to China and
Thailand (the contracts expire around 2030), has left the domestic market short of gas.
Domestic consumers have turned to more costly fuel oil – according to the World Bank,
more than 75% of companies in Myanmar own a generator (World Bank, 2015a) – or more
polluting coal (over 5 GW of coal-fired power plant are being planned) to meet their energy
needs. There was a programme to convert gasoline vehicles to use natural gas (in Yangon
and Mandalay), but a shortage of natural gas effectively stalled the initiative. Most of the
country’s offshore shelf is completely unexplored (with only 3 out of 17 identified basins
thoroughly explored) and only 3 of its 14 onshore basins have been explored. Furthermore,
a lack of comprehensive and accessible geological data increases investment risk and limits
investor interest.
Indonesia faces a similar set of problems. Reform of wholesale natural gas pricing and gas
allocation mechanisms, including the long-term goal of moving the market towards netback
parity with LNG export prices, would help to provide reliable pricing signals for investment,
as well as supporting more efficient use of gas. Reform of the regulatory framework, which
is viewed as complicated and unclear, could also stimulate investment in the country’s
conventional and sizeable unconventional gas resources, notably coalbed methane. The
investment climate would also benefit from an expansion of infrastructure to connect
demand centres (especially Java and Sumatra) and the geographically dispersed gas
production regions. Pipelines, floating storage regasification units for LNG, and even smallChapter 1 | Energy in Southeast Asia today

31

1

scale LNG supply for smaller demand centres on outer islands (e.g. to displace costly and
polluting diesel generators) could all be part of the solution. The gas transmission sector
currently suffers from a number of problems: a lack of integrated long-term planning;
extensive lead times for infrastructure planning, construction and commission; a lack of coordination between different stakeholders; and physical bottlenecks.
The examples of Myanmar and Indonesia highlight that a co-ordinated set of policy
decisions to develop or expand infrastructure and foster gas production growth would be
vital for natural gas to make further inroads in Southeast Asia’s energy system. This would
include better interconnections of the various gas markets through pipeline links or via LNG
trade and co-operation on energy security issues. The planned Trans ASEAN Gas Pipeline
project (TAGP) and the establishment of Singapore as a gas hub would be notable steps in
this direction.

Coal

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Coal is the most abundant fossil fuel in Southeast Asia, with around 31 billion tonnes of
reserves as of end-2015. Commensurate with its resources, the region is also a large
producer, and mined around 400 million tonnes of coal equivalent (Mtce) in 2016.
Indonesia is by far the biggest coal producer in the region and the only net exporter. In
2016, Indonesia produced 350 Mtce, of which 290 Mtce was exported, making it one of the
world’s largest exporters of steam coal. Indonesian coal production is concentrated on the
island of Kalimantan with some production also taking place in Sumatra (Figure 1.10). Costs
of coal production vary in Indonesia. Companies with access to low-cost coal (typically
shallow seams and access to inland transport via a system of navigable rivers) have very
competitive costs whereas smaller producers increasingly have difficulties to make ends
meet.
Boom years for Indonesia‘s coal industry between 2003 and 2013, saw export growth rates
of over 15% per year. Yet overcapacity in the international coal market has hit Indonesia
hard. While rivals like Australia, Russia and South Africa have benefitted from a devaluation
of their local currencies against the US dollar, this effect did not help Indonesian coal
companies as the vast majority of their costs (fuel, explosives, machinery, etc.) are incurred
in US dollars. This has significantly weakened their competitive position vis-à-vis other
exporters. Moreover, with coal readily available on the international market, producers of
low quality coal, as is the case in Indonesia, see demand weakening as consumers can easily
procure coal with higher energy content. The cost advantage of Indonesian coal, compared
to Australian coal, has diminished over the last couple of years. Many smaller, high-cost
producers had to leave the market as they were running at a loss (or were shut down as
Indonesian authorities moved to curtail illegal mining activity). Yet, idled Indonesian coal
mines are simple truck-and-shovel operations that can quickly be brought back online if
prices are favourable. Indonesia thus has become kind of a swing-supplier in the
international market.

32

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

Figure 1.10 ⊳ Free on board cash costs for steam coal exports from Indonesia,

Dollars per tonne

2016
80

1

South Sumatra
South Kalimantan

60

Central Kalimantan

Average FOB coal price in 2016

East Kalimantan

40

20

0

50

100

150

200

250

300
350
Production (Mt)

The majority of Indonesia’s coal production remains profitable at current export prices
Note: FOB = free on board; Mt = million tonnes.

Viet Nam is the second-largest coal producer in Southeast Asia, with output of some
30 Mtce in 2016. Most of its production is anthracite (a type of high rank coal) which, in the
case of Viet Nam, has relatively high ash content, is not easily substituted and often
requires a specific boiler configuration for use in coal-fired power plants. The state-owned
mining company, Vinacomin, is responsible for nearly all the production and is one of the
largest employers in the country (some 120 000 people are estimated to work in Viet Nam’s
coal industry). Despite significant coal reserves of 3 400 million tonnes, Viet Nam’s coal
production has stayed relatively flat over the last ten years and with stagnating production
and soaring domestic demand its exports have been declining. In 2006, Viet Nam exported
three-quarters of its output (mostly to China), but exports have been dropping steeply and
2015 marked the switch from it being a net exporter to a net importer of coal.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

There are coal mining operations in several other countries in the region. Malaysia has a
handful of mines in Sarawak on the island of Borneo that together produced just over
2 Mtce in 2016. Thailand’s current production of nearly 6 Mtce of lignite from the Lampang
province in the north is used for power generation near the mines (the high sulfur content
of the coal has, in the past, led to significant air pollution problems but now the plants are
equipped with control technology). The Philippines produced more than 8 Mtce of mostly
sub-bituminous coal in 2016 for domestic use and export, with most of it produced in a
large open cast mine on Semirara Island.

Renewables
Renewable energy sources are abundant in Southeast Asia and remain an important and, in
some regions, a dominant source of energy supply. The technical potential is large for
Chapter 1 | Energy in Southeast Asia today

33

bioenergy (from feedstocks such as agricultural and forestry crops and residues, and animal
and municipal solid waste). Hydro already plays an important role in power supply,
generating 14% of the region’s electricity in 2016. Considerable untapped potential remains
to expand hydro facilities (particularly in the Greater Mekong sub-region, namely
Cambodia, Lao PDR, Myanmar, Thailand and Viet Nam), although increasing environmental
and social challenges are making them more difficult to develop. China is actively investing
in the development of hydropower projects in Southeast Asia, particularly in Cambodia, Lao
PDR and Myanmar. Geothermal resources have been tapped and produced 2% of the
region’s electricity in 2016, with Indonesia and Philippines being in the top-three in the
world in terms of installed capacity. Yet the region’s geothermal resources are undeveloped
relative to its potential. Wind and solar PV remain small in terms of overall generation,
although their deployment is growing. Thailand, in particular, is rapidly installing solar PV
capacity, driven by supportive policies. Solar PV has the potential to play a unique role in
bringing electricity access to a portion of the 65 million people in the region whom lack
access. For instance, solar PV used in an off-grid or diesel-hybrid system can bypass the
need to make costly investments to connect remote regions and small islands to existing
transmission or to build new networks (see Chapter 3 for a full discussion on the role of
renewables in energy access).
Southeast Asia accounts for a vast majority of the world’s palm oil production and this
industry is supported by biofuel mandates in several countries. Indonesia, the world’s
largest producer of palm oil, increased its mandate in 2015 to require a 20% biodiesel
(produced from palm oil) blend for transport, and a 30% mandate for diesel used in power
generation. Malaysia recently announced plans to raise its “B7” mandate for blending 7%
palm methyl ester for transport to 10%.

1.3

Factors affecting’s energy development
in Southeast Asia

1.3.1

Economy and demographics

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Collectively the Southeast Asian economies have grown by more than 125% since 2000, to
reach $7.4 trillion in 2016 (year-2016 dollars in purchasing power parity [PPP] terms),
making it one of the fastest growing regions in the world over the period. Within the group,
the rates of growth and the overall size of the economies vary greatly, with per-capita
income levels in the four poorest (Myanmar, Cambodia, Lao PDR and Viet Nam) standing at
just one-fifth the regional average. However, over the last 15 years, these countries have
grown at a significantly faster rate than their peers, signalling a modest convergence
between ASEAN members (Figure 1.11).
A number of factors have contributed to this period of high, sustained growth. Southeast
Asia saw one the largest improvements of any region in total factor productivity between
2000 and 2015 (2% per year), thanks in part to a general reorientation of economies from
agriculture, towards higher value manufacturing and services. This reorientation has been
34

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

facilitated by a steep increase in foreign direct investment (FDI), which rose from around
$21 billion in 2000 to over $120 billion in 2015 (in current terms), making the region the
fourth-largest recipient of FDI in the world. In several countries, political and economic
reform has been the key enabler for growth, not least in Myanmar, which in 2011 began a
transition from military rule to civilian government, paving the way for an almost three-fold
increase in FDI the next year.
Figure 1.11 ⊳ Average economic growth rate and per-capita income levels in

2%

20

GDP growth

GDP per
capita
(right axis)

Brunei
Darusallam

40

Thailand

4%

Philippines

60

Malaysia

6%

Indonesia

80

Singapore

8%

Viet Nam

100

Laos

10%

Cambodia

120

Myanmar

12%

Thousand dollars (2016)

Southeast Asian countries, 2000-2015

Many of the region’s poorest countries have also been its fastest growing

© OECD/IEA, 2017

The single largest source of foreign investment in the region was other ASEAN members,
making up almost one-fifth of the total, pointing to the importance of increased economic
integration (ASEAN, 2016). The relationship between the region’s countries is also
fundamental for trade, with exports rising more than three-fold since 2000, intra-ASEAN
trade totalled around $540 billion in 2015, making trade between countries within the
region more important than with any other external partner. Trade with China
($346 billion) has been rising steadily for over two decades, but particularly since 2005,
when the ASEAN-China Free Trade Area agreement came into effect for the trade of goods.
Major trading partners include: Japan ($238 billion); Europe ($228 billion); United States
($212 billion) and Korea ($122 billion), while trade with India ($59 billion) is increasingly
important.
Taking into consideration other capital flows, mostly concerning aid and concessional loans,
China is by some distance the region’s most important partner. Following a pledge of
$20 billion in loans to the region for infrastructure development in 2014, China offered
$11.5 billion in loans and credit to Myanmar, Lao PDR, Thailand, Cambodia and Viet Nam in
2016. It has also increasingly pursued bilateral trade, investment and aid relationships with
these countries. Similarly, Japan and Korea play a significant role in financing development
Chapter 1 | Energy in Southeast Asia today

35

1

in the region, with Japan in 2016 extending a 100 billion yen (nearly $1 billion)
infrastructure loan to Myanmar and Korea in 2017 pledging a $420 million development
loan to Cambodia to finance roads and other key infrastructure projects. Multilateral
financing from a range of institutions plays a vital and growing role in energy infrastructure
across the region.
The region’s demographic trends have also been integral to its economic growth. The
working-age population has expanded from 63% on average in 2000, to around 67% in
2015, a slightly larger proportion than the world average at 66%. Furthermore, the
movement of people to cities (the urbanisation rate increased from 38% to 48% over the
same period) has translated into a gradual diversion of labour from low value-added
agriculture towards manufacturing and services — the share of agriculture in GDP has
fallen by 3.2 percentage points between 2000 and 2016.

1.3.2

Energy pricing and fossil-fuel subsidies7

Fossil-fuel subsidies are prevalent in many parts of the world, including in Southeast Asia.
Six countries – Brunei Darussalam, Indonesia, Malaysia, Myanmar, Thailand and Viet Nam –
subsidise the use of fossil fuels and electricity prices. Efforts to phase out subsidies in the
region date back decades. These received a boost by the decline in oil prices since mid2014, with Indonesia, Thailand and Malaysia taking the opportunity of lower international
prices to accelerate reforms. IEA analysis estimates fossil-fuel subsidies in Southeast Asia at
around $17 billion in 2015, a fall of 57% since 2014 (Figure 1.12).8 Around half of the total
stems from electricity ($9 billion) and almost all of the rest from oil ($8 billion). Reflecting
policy efforts to reduce subsidies in the transport sector, fossil-fuel subsidies in Southeast
Asia are now concentrated in the residential sector, which accounted for more than half of
the total in 2015. Among fuels used in the residential sector, subsidies for LPG and
electricity dominate.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Fossil-fuel consumption subsidies artificially lower end-user prices to below international
market levels and lower consumer electricity prices to below the full cost of supply by
subsidising the prices of fossil fuels used to generate power. The rationale for providing
fossil-fuel subsidies has typically been linked to various social and economic objectives, for
example, to reduce energy poverty, ensure energy access and redistribute national wealth
stemming from the exploitation of natural resources. In practice, however, subsidies, if not
efficiently targeted, often disproportionally benefit wealthier segments of society, who
consume more of the subsidised products. They also deprive states from valuable revenue
that is often needed for infrastructure investment. Fossil-fuel subsidies often encourage
wasteful use of energy and discourage investment in energy efficiency and low-carbon
7

For more information on fossil-fuel subsidies in Asia, see “Tracking Fossil-Fuel Subsidies in APEC
Economies” (IEA, 2017).
8

For more detailed information on our methodology to
www.worldenergyoutlook.org/resources/energysubsidies/methodology/.

36

estimate

subsidies,

see

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

technologies thereby increasing energy-related carbon-dioxide (CO2) emissions. Artificially
low electricity prices can also discourage private investment in the power sector, as they
hamper the ability of private investors to recoup their investment cost and make necessary
returns.

60

120

40

80

20

40

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

Dollars per barrel (2016)

Billion dollars (2016)

Figure 1.12 ⊳ Fossil-fuel subsidies in Southeast Asia
Electricity
Oil
Gas
Coal
IEA average
crude-oil prices
(right axis)

2015

The value of fossil-fuel consumption subsidies is falling in Southeast Asia,
thanks to policy efforts and lower international oil prices

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Recent policy developments in reforming fossil-fuel subsidies
Rising energy demand has made fossil-fuel subsidy reform a key issue for many
governments in Southeast Asia, despite the associated political difficulties. Rising energy
demand, which for many countries in the region means increased reliance on imported
energy, can lead to rising costs to sustain the subsidies that are usually borne by
governments. In Indonesia, the government abolished subsidies for gasoline in 2015 and
fixed subsidies for diesel at Indonesian rupiah (IDR) 500/litre (about $0.04) in 2016. Prices
are now reviewed every three months based on a formula reflecting international oil prices
and the cost of supply. This adjustment mechanism was designed to allow Pertamina, the
national oil company, to manage the difference between the oil product prices and the one
calculated by the formula. The reforms saved the government around IDR 120 trillion
($9 billion) in 2015, which has been redirected to infrastructure development and social
programmes. However, since September 2016, gasoline prices have remained stable at
IDR 6 450/litre ($0.49, RON 88), lower than the prices calculated by the formula, implying
the existence of a subsidy. The cost of the subsidies is currently borne by Pertamina as the
government budget for 2016 and 2017 does not explicitly include allowances for subsidies
for gasoline. LPG subsidies constitute the bulk of the remaining oil subsidies in Indonesia,
while those for kerosene have declined significantly. LPG is particularly important for the
poorer segments of society, especially those without access to clean cooking facilities in
Chapter 1 | Energy in Southeast Asia today

37

1

remote areas. The current LPG scheme does not subsidise consumers directly but instead
targets 3-kilogramme (kg) LPG cylinders sold in the market and has led to the gas being
diverted to commercial use. To avoid such diversion, the government is considering
reforming subsidies so that only eligible and targeted consumers receive a cash subsidy
directly, rather than subsidising LPG suppliers (MEMR, 2017a). Various challenges need to
be overcome for successful implementation, including effective system design to identify
and transfer subsidies to eligible consumers, communication campaigns to the public to
raise awareness and transparent pricing mechanisms for those who are not eligible for
subsidies (GSI, 2016).
Indonesia is also reforming electricity subsidies. As recently as 2012, all of Indonesia’s
37 categories of electricity consumer were subsidised. Electricity tariffs for some
consumers, including industrial and residential users, have been gradually increased since
2013 and eligibility criteria for subsidies have been tightened. As of 2016, almost 80% of
the total number of households receiving subsidies were in the 450 Volt-ampere (VA) and
900-VA category, the two classes with the lowest level of consumption among six
residential customer classes. Government studies found that only around 4 million out of
23 million customers in the 900-VA customer class meet the income threshold to be eligible
for subsidies. Since January 2017, subsidies for the 900-VA customer class are being
progressively reduced. This saw the electricity price for 900-Va customers more than
double, from IND 586 ($0.04) per kilowatt-hour (kWh) in December 2016 to
IND 1 352 ($0.1)/kWh in May 2017, and since then prices have been revised every two
months. This is expected to reduce electricity subsidies substantially, leading to the share
of subsidised customers declining from 79% in 2016 to 46% (MEMR, 2017b). Nonetheless,
24 customer classes, including industry and commercial consumers, continue to receive
subsidies for electricity.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

In Malaysia, continuous efforts have been made to phase out subsidies and in December
2014, subsidies for gasoline and diesel were eliminated. Prices are now set monthly based
on movements in international markets, while residential LPG remains subsidised. Malaysia
is also working towards phasing out electricity subsidies. Currently the government
indirectly subsidises electricity by regulating the price of natural gas, a primary source of
electricity generation. In January 2014, a fuel cost pass-through mechanism was introduced,
which adjusted electricity prices every six months to reflect changes in fuel and supply costs.
The government continues to reduce the subsidy, and it increased the price of natural gas
to power producers in both 2015 and 2016.
Myanmar provides subsidies to natural gas as an input to electricity generation. In the 2016
fiscal year, average electricity supply cost was around Myanmar Kyat (MMK) 94/kWh
(about $0.07/kWh), of which around 24% was subsidised by the government (Ministry of
Electricity and Energy, Republic of the Union of Myanmar, 2017). The total electricity
subsidy was estimated to be around MMK 300 billion (around $230 million) in 2015, or
around 2% of the national budget. In transport, only compressed natural gas (CNG) for
38

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

vehicles is subsidised. Myanmar recognises the need to reform fossil-fuel subsidies and has
established a review of energy pricing and subsidies in its National Energy Plan 2015 (ADB,
2016). Thailand has also made progress in reforming fossil-fuel subsidies. The Oil Plan 20152036 stipulates the intent to reform prices of subsidised fuel such as CNG and LPG to reflect
the cost of supply. After a gradual increase in CNG prices in 2014 and 2015, the prices of
CNG were floated to follow international fuel prices in 2016. A reform in LPG pricing in
2017 reflects the changes in international oil prices, while the policy to provide subsidies to
low-income households continues.
In Viet Nam, gasoline and diesel prices are not fully deregulated. The Petroleum Price
Stabilisation Fund is used to reduce the price fluctuation stemming from changes in
international oil prices. Electricity tariffs are also subsidised and despite some reform, they
do not reflect cost-recovery level (ADB, 2015), though the subsidy is implicit rather than
direct fiscal transfers. The national master plan for electricity development towards 2020
aims to increase prices gradually to allow power utilities, including Viet Nam’s dominant
national power company, EVN, to recoup the cost of supply. In 2017, the government
eased the pricing regulation for EVN, allowing it to change electricity prices by 3-5%
without the government’s approval, but any rise above 5% requires approval and no clear
path to price liberalisation has been formulated. Retail electricity prices were raised in 2015,
but they remain relatively low in the Southeast Asia region.
In Brunei Darussalam, the value of fossil-fuel subsidies is among the lowest in the region,
but on a per-capita basis, it is the highest, at around $360 per capita in 2015. Subsidies are
provided to oil products and electricity, with the bulk going to gasoline and diesel. The
electricity tariff structure was revised upwards in 2012. In Thailand, the government ended
untargeted LPG subsides in 2014 and floated CNG prices in 2016. The only subsidies
remaining in Thailand are for LPG for low income households and small business owners.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

The value of fossil-fuel subsidies can fluctuate from year-to-year for a number of reasons,
including changes in international energy prices, changes in energy consumption, pricing
reforms, inflation and currency exchange rates. IEA decomposition analysis identifies the
relative contribution of each of these factors to the $13 billion decline in the value of
subsidies in Southeast Asia between 2010 and 2015. Had fuel and end-user prices remained
constant over the period, the increase in energy consumption between 2010 and 2015
would have increased the value of subsidies by around $5 billion, corresponding to around
15% of the value of subsidies in 2010. However, pricing reforms and falling fuel prices
between 2010 and 2015 more than offset the increase, decreasing subsidies by around
$5 billion and $13 billion, respectively (Figure 1.13).
Although prices of transport oil products in Indonesia and Malaysia now fluctuate based on
prices in international markets, they remain regulated and are not completely liberalised.
This leaves the door open for subsidies to be re-introduced if international prices rise,
particularly if there is political and public pressure to alleviate the impact of price hikes. The
rationale for this discretionary approach is that the governments reserve the right to act to
Chapter 1 | Energy in Southeast Asia today

39

1

protect vulnerable consumers, but the risk of a failure to sustain the reforms could be
substantial if retail prices do not respond to movements in international fuel prices (IEA,
2017). Another challenge in reforming subsidies in Southeast Asia lies in the residential
sector, in which subsidies to electricity and LPG are significant. These energy carriers are
crucial to providing access to energy, especially for the poor. As seen in Indonesia and
Malaysia, subsidised LPG is often diverted to commercial purposes, leaving room to
consider more targeted provision of subsidies. As electricity consumption is growing rapidly
in the region, reforming electricity subsidies, including the gradual phase-out of subsidies
and better targeting for the vulnerable groups, will be crucial. Various examples of sound
reform exist across the world, which can provide valuable lessons to aid policy design.
Figure 1.13 ⊳ Contributing factors to the change in the value of fossil-fuel

Billion dollars (2016)

subsidies in Southeast Asia, 2010 – 2015
40

30

20

10

2010
subsidies

Higher
consumption

Fuel
price

Pricing
reforms

2015
subsidies

Lower international energy prices made the biggest contribution to the reduction
in fossil-fuel subsidies in Southeast Asia, but pricing reforms also played a role

© OECD/IEA, 2017

1.3.3

Access to modern energy9

Access to modern energy is essential for people’s quality of life and welfare and Southeast
Asian countries have made significant progress in expanding access to modern energy in
recent years. Although our estimate shows that around 65 million people, roughly 10% of
Southeast Asia’s population, still lacked access to electricity in 2016, the share of people
with electricity access has improved by almost 30 percentage points since 2000, thanks to
various government efforts (Table 1.1). Across the region, the electrification rate has
increased from 62% in 2000 to 90% in 2016, as Malaysia, Thailand and Viet Nam achieved
almost complete access to electricity, while other countries, such as Indonesia and
9

The global outlook for energy access is presented in the newly-released WEO Special Report: Energy Access
Outlook: from Poverty to Prosperity, which can be accessed for free at: www.iea.org/energyaccess.

40

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

Philippines, have also been significantly improving access levels. Grid extensions have
provided an effective means to extend access to electricity, but in Indonesia and the
Philippines – both countries made up of thousands of islands – extending the grid is often
costly and distributed power generation, including renewables-based generation
technologies, can offer a more effective way of providing access (see Chapter 3). Currently,
diesel power is one of the major sources for electrification in islands in these countries, but
Indonesia is exploring options to take advantage of solar potential via a programme to
electrify 1 000 islands with 225 MW of solar or solar-diesel hybrid systems (PLN, 2017). In
Cambodia and Myanmar, roughly two-thirds of the population still lack access to electricity.
However, both countries have started implementing measures with ambitious targets to
2030: 100% of households in Myanmar and at least 70% in Cambodia. Myanmar has
promoted rural electrification programmes in co-operation with international financial
institutions, such as the World Bank, which has financed $400 million for projects in the
period to 2021 (World Bank, 2015b). Cambodia has pursued programmes for rural grid
connection since 2013 by offering interest free loans for private electricity suppliers and
poor households.
Table 1.1 ⊳

Access to modern energy services in Southeast Asia
Population without access to
electricity (2016)
Million

Share (%)

Population primarily relying on
traditional use of biomass (2015)
Million

Share (%)

Brunei Darussalam

-

-

-

-

Cambodia

6

40%

13

83%

Indonesia

23

9%

67

26%

Lao PDR

<1

9%

7

96%

Malaysia

<1

1%

-

-

Myanmar

22

41%

51

94%

Philippines

11

10%

61

60%

Singapore

-

-

-

26%

Thailand

-

-

18

Viet Nam

2

2%

36

39%

Total ASEAN

65

10%

252

40%

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Note: Estimates based on IEA energy access database and World Health Organization (WHO) household
energy database.

In addition to improving access to electricity, challenges also exist in Southeast Asia to
provide access to clean cooking facilities, with around 250 million people relying on
biomass for cooking in 2015, accounting for around 40% of the total population in the
region. Solid biomass is used mostly in rural regions across Southeast Asia. The use of
biomass in unimproved cookstoves in households represents a serious health risk, with
around 270 000 premature deaths in the region in 2015 attributed to poor indoor air
quality.
Chapter 1 | Energy in Southeast Asia today

41

1

1.3.4

Social and environmental aspects

Water
Energy development and climate change have important impacts on water resources in
Southeast Asia, most prominently in the countries of the Lower Mekong River Basin
spanning Cambodia, Myanmar, Viet Nam and Lao PDR. Much of the population around the
river system depend on it for drinking water, fishing, transport, irrigation and food, with
around 85% of the rural population making their living directly from the various resources
within the basin.
Hydropower resources on the Mekong River are significant, with over 32 GW of capacity
installed (predominantly in the upper Mekong where China has built seven dams on the
Lancang River and has plans for 20 more), and a further 30 GW of potential as yet
undeveloped in the lower Mekong region. Upstream dams, combined with El Niño-linked
weather patterns, have taken a toll on the Mekong River Basin, with water levels at their
lowest since records began 100 years ago. In 2015 and 2016, drought hit a number of
countries, including Cambodia, where 18 of 25 provinces reported water shortages,
affecting an estimated 93 500 rural households, and Viet Nam, where two million people
were thought to have lost access to drinking water. This stress, coupled with the high
numbers of people directly reliant on the river for their livelihoods, makes large-scale
projects controversial. In an effort to ensure responsible development, Thailand, Cambodia,
Lao PDR and Viet Nam signed the “Mekong Agreement” in 1995, which stipulates that all
countries must approve major projects on the lower Mekong River. This treaty has not
been able to allay fully concerns over potential transboundary impacts of dams. Concerns
over the Xayaburi dam led to Cambodia and Viet Nam asking for a delay of the project.

Land
Land use, energy production and greenhouse-gas emissions (GHG) are closely
interconnected in Southeast Asia, due in part to the region being responsible for over 80%
of the world’s palm oil production, prominently used as a biofuel.10 Palm oil is Indonesia’s
second-largest export product (after coal) and employs around 3.7 million people there and
a further 860 000 people in Malaysia. It is considered particularly important for rural
economic development. A third of allowances for new palm oil plantations in Indonesia and
Malaysia – by some distance the world’s largest two producers – are situated on peat-rich
primary forests. This land type absorbs carbon at a rate of 1 450 tonnes per hectare, raising
concerns that the emissions associated with the growth of palms is greater than the
amount offset by the subsequent substitution of hydrocarbons with the biofuel. 11
Recognising the importance of a sustainable palm oil industry, in 2015 Indonesia

© OECD/IEA, 2017

10

Several countries have a biofuels mandate, with Indonesia’s latest, released in March 2015, increasing
mandatory biodiesel blending to 20% for transportation and industrial uses, and to 30% for electricity
generation.
11
Land use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF), and peat and forest fires account for 63% of total
greenhouse-gas emissions in Indonesia.

42

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

introduced a nationwide certification process for smallholder farms, responsible for around
40% of the country’s production, which helps establish more environment-friendly
methods that also increase productivity. Malaysia announced a similar certification scheme
in 2015, which is to be mandatory by 2019. Prioritising sustainability in the palm oil industry
could have benefits beyond the environment. In 2017, the European Union recommended
a ban on biofuels made from vegetable oils by 2020 as a response to their perceived
contribution to deforestation.

Local air pollution
Rapid economic and population growth since 2000, coupled with increasing urbanisation
has led to a strong rise in energy demand across the region, met primarily by fossil fuels.
Yet, despite growth in supply, around 10% of the population still has no access to electricity
and almost 40% have no access to clean cookstoves, relying instead, on the use of
fuelwood and charcoal for cooking. The combination of rapid economic and energy
demand growth, with increasing urbanisation and reliance on the traditional use of biomass
presents a serious threat in terms of air pollution. Air quality standards are in place in
several countries in the region. However, while some of the standards comply with the
World Health Organization (WHO) interim targets, enforcement action is limited and
concentration limits are frequently exceeded.
Combustion of coal for power generation and industrial processes is the largest source of
energy-related sulfur dioxide (SO2) emissions in Southeast Asia today, accounting for more
than half of the total 2.3 Mt of SO2 emissions. Around 40% of the region’s SO2 emissions
from coal-fired power generation occur in Indonesia alone. Energy-related nitrous oxides
(NOX) emissions were almost 4.9 Mt in 2015, of which around 75% were from oil
combustion, primarily in the transport sector. The number of private cars in the region has
more than doubled since 2000, reflecting income growth, although two/three-wheelers
and public buses remain important sources of mobility and, hence, urban NOX emissions.
Fine particulate matter (PM2.5) emissions from the energy sector are very high, at 2.6 Mt in
2015, mostly from the residential sector. More than 90% of the emissions from households
arise from the use of fuelwood and charcoal for cooking and heating. The consequent
human and environmental burden of air pollution in the region is considerable.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Climate change
Southeast Asia is considered to be among the most vulnerable regions to the effects of
climate change. Its coastal regions are particularly at risk. In Indonesia, 42 million people
live less than 3 km from the sea in areas that are less than 10 metres above sea level. About
80% of natural disasters are “hydro-meteorological” events and these are expected to grow
in number and severity with the effects of climate change. Average temperatures have
been rising at around 0.14 degrees Celsius (°C) – 0.20 °C per decade since 1960, while the
average rainfall on wet days has increase by 22 millimetres per decade (Hijioka et al.,
2014).

Chapter 1 | Energy in Southeast Asia today

43

1

Power generation accounts for the largest share of Southeast Asia’s energy-related CO2
emissions, having grown by more than 150% since 2000. This increase is slightly less than
the overall increase in generation however, reflecting a marginal improvement in the CO2
intensity of power generation partly explained by the shift from oil towards gas-fired
generation. Despite the recent improvement, the carbon intensity of the region’s power
sector remains around one-fifth higher than the world average, in part because renewables
make up a smaller share of generation (18%) than the world average (24%).
Non energy-related emissions are significant across Southeast Asia and this is reflected in a
number of the Nationally Determine Contributions that formed the Paris Agreement in
2015. Lao PDR, for example, pledged to increase its forest cover to 70% of its total land
area by 2020, while Viet Nam, Cambodia and Lao PDR all committed to increase efforts to
protect their forests and promote reforestation. A number of the region’s countries act as
greenhouse-gas sinks, by virtue of their forest coverage.
Box 1.2 ⊳

Growing needs for climate-resilient energy infrastructure

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Southeast Asia is particularly vulnerable to climatic impacts, with extreme weather
events, high temperatures and extreme precipitation patterns posing a range of risks to
energy infrastructure, supply and demand. Climate change is expected to exacerbate
these threats.


Increasing water stress caused by changing hydrological patterns have direct
repercussions for hydropower generation, which makes up important shares of
electricity generation, notably those in the Lower Mekong Basin region (Lao PDR,
Myanmar, Viet Nam, Cambodia and Thailand). The 2016 drought in the Mekong
delta, which along with climate change was attributed to the El Niño phenomenon
and increased dam construction upstream, resulted in the lowest water levels in
Viet Nam in almost a century and negatively affected hydropower production
across the region. Thermal power generation, particularly coal, is also highly
dependent on the availability of water for steam cooling. Rising water constraints
can increase cooling costs for power plants and may require adoption of
alternative cooling technologies or improved water management practices.



Certain Southeast Asian countries face acute risks from rising frequency and
magnitude of extreme weather events, which can cause extensive damage to
infrastructure and disrupt energy supply that fuels essential services across the
economy. A notable case was Typhoon Haiyan in 2013, which in the Philippines
caused widespread power loss, damage to electricity grids and other energy
infrastructure, and an oil spill. Infrastructure located near coastlines and rivers,
such as oil refineries, tanker ports and LNG terminals, as well as pipelines face
compounded risks from sea level rise and increased flood risk. Sea level rise is
projected to be 10-15% greater in Southeast Asia compared to the global average,
increasing over 1 metre from current levels in certain cities by the end of the
century (World Bank, 2013).

44

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report



Rising temperatures reduce the efficiency of electricity transmission and
distribution lines, as well as that of thermal processes in power plants. Projected
warmer temperatures, including more frequent and intense heat waves, will
increase cooling and energy demand during the summer months. The 2016 heat
wave in Thailand broke national energy consumption records and prompted the
Electricity Generating Authority of Thailand (EGAT), the national power utility, to
call for curbs in consumption.

Increasing resilience to such impacts requires a range of organisational, policy and
financial measures to be taken. These include improving the quality and availability of
downscaled climate data, increased organisational capacity for risk assessment and
emergency preparedness and response, strengthened technical standards for
infrastructure, and a supportive framework for financing both asset preparedness as
well as post-disruption recovery. The projected increases in energy and infrastructure
investments in Southeast Asia create a unique opportunity to build resilience into the
energy system while ensuring it meets other objectives such as energy access, energy
security and decarbonisation.

1.3.5

Investment

Investment in energy supply in Southeast Asia has averaged around $50 billion per year
since 2000. Investment in oil and gas made up around more than half of the total, but was
still insufficient to reverse a decline in oil output or to replenish oil production with new
reserves through exploration; remaining technically recoverable resources have fallen by
more than 15% since 2000. Investment in the natural gas sector has seen the region’s gas
production increase by around 40% since 2000 (Figure 1.14). Around two-thirds of the total
coal supply investment since 2000 was in Indonesia, which accounted for $1.4 billion of the
$2.2 billion per year spent over the period. This represents a five-fold increase in
investments over the average of the 1990s, enabling a commensurate increase in
production.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Around $365 billion in investment has been made in the power sector across Southeast
Asia since 2000, a little over half ($195 billion) of which went towards grid expansion and
improvement. While the region saw the third-highest investment in coal-fired generation
over the period (after China and India), it invested more in renewables since 2000 than in
coal, with the $69 billion in renewables investment making it the single largest tranche of
investment in generation across the region (compared with $66 billion for coal and
$35 billion for gas).
Both the private and public sectors have a played prominent role in meeting Southeast
Asia’s investment needs. Large international oil companies are active across the region,
including in Myanmar, Malaysia, Thailand, Indonesia and Brunei Darussalam. A growing
amount of investment has come from publicly owned energy companies making
investments offshore. One example is Ratchaburi Electricity and PPT (Thailand), which
Chapter 1 | Energy in Southeast Asia today

45

1

made a joint investment of $400 million in an LNG terminal in Myanmar in 2015. Another is
the CH. Karnchang Public Company’s agreement with Lao PDR for the development of the
Xayburi hydroelectric project, which is underpinned by a power purchase agreement with
the Electricity Generating Authority of Thailand.

Billion dollars (2016)

Figure 1.14 ⊳ Energy supply investment by type in Southeast Asia
80

Coal
Gas

60

Oil
Power T&D
Power plants

40

20

2000

2005

2010

2016

Power sector investments are growing increasingly important
in the overall supply investment picture

1.4

Projecting future developments

The evolution of energy demand and supply in Southeast Asia will be determined by the
interplay of a number of factors, such as government policies, demographic change,
urbanisation, economic trends including shifts in the structure of economic activity, energy
pricing and technological developments.

1.4.1

Defining the scenarios

© OECD/IEA, 2017

The projections in our Southeast Asia Energy Outlook 2017 (the results of which are set out
in Chapter 2) look out to 2040 and are derived from the overall methodological approach
used in the World Energy Outlook-2017 (WEO-2017).12 The central scenario in this Outlook
is the New Policies Scenario. It takes into account existing policies and measures as well as
announced policy intentions in the ten countries of the ASEAN. It therefore incorporates
both existing progress and, to varying degrees, achievement of the pledges contained in
the Nationally Determined Contributions ratified in the Paris Climate Agreement. Where
12

Chapter 1 of WEO-2017, which describes the scope of the analytical work and the underlying assumptions
and price trajectories used, is available at: www.worldenergyoutlook.org (as from 14 November 2017).

46

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

policy intentions are not backed by clearly defined implementing measures, then our
assessment of possible regulatory, market, infrastructure and financing constraints
determines how far and how fast these intentions are met.
We also refer to two additional scenarios modelled in WEO-2017. The Current Policies
Scenario depicts a path for Southeast Asian countries shorn of all policy intentions that, as
of mid-2017, had yet to be expressed in specific implementing measures. No allowance is
made for changes in policies or measures beyond this point, regardless of announced
intentions. The Current Policies Scenario can therefore be considered as the “default
setting” for the region’s energy system, with little or no change compared with what has
already been agreed and settled. Its results provide a benchmark against which the impact
of “new” policies can be measured.
The Sustainable Development Scenario13, a new feature of this year’s WEO, is a scenario
that meets the key energy-related goals of the United Nations Sustainable Development
Agenda. It describes a world in which countries take urgent action on climate change, in
line with the Paris Agreement, while also achieving universal access to modern energy by
2030 and a dramatic decline in the emissions that cause poor air quality.
The projections for all three scenarios are derived from the IEA’s World Energy Model
(WEM). The WEM is a large-scale simulation model designed to replicate how energy
markets function, that consists of three main modules: (i) final energy consumption; (ii)
energy transformation; and (iii) oil, natural gas, coal and renewable supply. Assumptions
based on analysis of the latest developments in energy markets, the broader economy and
energy and climate policy, are used as inputs to the WEM, together with huge quantities of
historical data on economic and energy variables. These data were obtained from a wide
variety of sources.

1.4.2

Key assumptions

Economic growth
Southeast Asia is a major pillar of economic growth in Asia. The combined GDP of the ten
ASEAN member countries has increased by around 125% since 2000. Huge wealth
disparities exist both among and within countries in the region: Singapore and Brunei
Darussalam rank among the wealthiest countries in the world in terms of GDP per capita,
while Cambodia, Lao PDR, Myanmar and Viet Nam are at the other extreme. There are also
significant social, cultural and institutional differences across the region.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

The energy projections in this Southeast Asia Outlook are highly sensitive to underlying
assumptions about economic growth — the principal driver of demand for energy services
in most countries. Our GDP growth assumptions have been based primarily on

13

The Sustainable Energy Scenario supplants the 450 Scenario, which had been used in previous World
Energy Outlook publications.

Chapter 1 | Energy in Southeast Asia today

47

1

International Monetary Fund projections, with some adjustments to reflect information
available from regional, national and other sources. We assume that Southeast Asia’s GDP
(expressed in real PPP terms) grows by 4.5% per year on average over the period 2016 to
2040, compared with 5.2% between 2000 and 2016. Growth slows from 5.1% per year in
the period to 2020 to 4.3% per year after 2020, as the region matures and population
growth declines. By 2040, the size of the economy almost triples, to reach $21 trillion (year2016 dollars, PPP terms). Average per-capita income rises from $11 600 to almost $27 600.

Energy prices
Our assumptions about international fossil-fuel prices reflect our analysis of the price levels
that would be needed to stimulate sufficient investment in supply to meet projected
demand over the period. They are used to derive average retail prices in end-use sectors,
and in power generation and other transformation sectors. These end-use prices take into
account local market conditions, including taxes, excise duties, as well as any subsidies. The
rates of value-added taxes and excise duties on fuels are assumed to remain unchanged,
except where future tax changes have been adopted or are planned.
In the New Policies Scenario, the average IEA crude oil import price – a proxy for
international oil prices – rises from today’s levels to more than $80/barrel (in real-2016
dollars) by the mid-2020s, with continued gradual increases thereafter. The price of natural
gas imports to the region is assumed to rise to almost $14 per Million British thermal units
(MBtu) by 2025. Having fallen precipitously since 2013 to $45/tonne in 2016, average
Indonesian steam coal export prices recover slowly, reaching around $63/tonne by 2040
(adjusted to 6 000 kilocalories per kilogramme). As they do at present, many Southeast Asia
countries are expected to continue to use lower cost and lower calorific-value coal for their
electricity needs.

Demographics

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Demographic change affects both the level and pattern of energy use, directly and through
its impact on economic growth and development. Our assumed rates of population growth
are based on the medium-variant of the latest UN projections (UNPD, 2015). Southeast
Asia’s population was estimated at almost 640 million in 2016. We assume Southeast Asia’s
population increases to over 760 million in 2040, 0.7% per year on average. The region’s
“demographic dividend”, which has been integral to its economic growth in the last
decades, remains in play, as the working-age population as a share of the total stays at
around 67%, higher than regional and global standards.
Urbanisation is another crucial demographic factor that ultimately impacts energy demand.
The proportion of people living in cities has grown by almost ten percentage points, to 48%
since 2000, and we assume further growth to 60% by 2040. This implies a 50% increase in
the number of people living in cities, to nearly 460 million, while the rural population
decreases by around 10%.
48

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

Growth in energy demand is correlated closely with growth in per-capita income, although
the relationship has decoupled in a number of advanced countries and may be weaker in
the future than expected in economies that are emerging today if they evolve with smart
urban planning, efficient transport systems and energy-efficient buildings. Nonetheless,
rising incomes will continue to lead to increased demand for goods that require energy to
use and to produce, such as cars, refrigerators and air conditioners.

Policies
Many Southeast Asian countries are seeking to rebalance their energy mix, responding to
their own resource availability, energy security and environmental concerns. A wide range
of policy developments have been made recently, notably those in the nationally
determined commitments underpinned by the Paris Agreement, and some key energy
targets that are summarised in Table 1.2. In support of Singapore’s target to reduce energy
intensity by 35% by 2030, it introduced energy efficiency standards and labelling for lamps
in 2015. The Philippines recently introduced an Energy Efficiency Roadmap 2014-30, with a
target of reducing energy intensity by 40% by 2030 compared with 2005 levels. The action
plan includes a wide range of measures, such as setting building energy efficiency codes
and introducing standards and labelling systems for appliances.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Targets for renewable energy have been reinforced in some Southeast Asian countries. In
2016, Viet Nam made upward adjustment to its non-hydro renewable capacity target in its
power development plan, from 9.4% to 21% of total installed capacity in 2030, and
decreased the share of coal-fired capacity from 52% to 43% in 2030. Thailand is set to use
30% of final energy consumption from renewable energy sources by 2036. To pursue these
goals, feed-in tariffs (FiTs) have been widely adopted in the region and these continue to be
updated. After introducing FiTs for wind, solid waste, small hydro and biomass, Viet Nam
established a FiT for solar PV in 2017. Indonesia extensively modified its renewable
purchasing policy in early 2017. 14 New policies are promoting electric vehicles (EVs).
Thailand aims to spur the development of an EV manufacturing industry, building on its
existing automobile manufacturing base, through incentives such as tax exemptions.
Malaysia has set a target of 100 000 EVs on the road by 2020 and 125 000 charging stations
nationwide.

14

In 2015, Indonesia increased its biofuels mandate (effective in 2016) to 20% for diesel used in transport,
industry and commercial enterprises, and 30% for diesel used in power generation.

Chapter 1 | Energy in Southeast Asia today

49

1

Table 1.2 ⊳ Selected energy targets in Southeast Asian countries
Country

Sector

Policies and targets

Brunei
Darussalam

Efficiency

Reduce total energy consumption by 63% from BAU levels by 2035.

Cambodia

Indonesia

Lao PDR

Malaysia

Myanmar
Philippines

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Singapore

Thailand

50

Renewables

Achieve 10% of electricity generation from renewables by 2035.

Climate change

Reduce CO2 emissions from morning peak-hour vehicle use by 40%
from BAU level by 2035.

Electrification

Universal electrification for all villages by 2020 and 70%
electrification for households by 2030.

Renewables

Increase capacity of hydropower to 2 241 MW by 2020.

Climate change

Reduce GHG emissions 27% from baseline emissions by 2030 with
international support.

Electrification

Achieve electrification ratio of 99.7% by 2025.

Efficiency

Reduce energy intensity by 1% per year to 2025.

New and renewable
energy*

Increase share of new and renewable energy in primary energy
supply to reach 23% by 2025 and 31% by 2050.

Climate change

Reduce GHG emissions 26% and 29% from BAU level by 2020 and by
2030, respectively, and 41% by 2020 with international support.

Electrification

Achieve electrification rate of 98% by 2025.

Efficiency

Reduce final energy consumption from BAU level by 10%.

Renewables

Achieve 30% share of renewables in primary energy supply by 2025.

Efficiency

Promote energy efficiency in the industry, buildings and domestic
sectors with methods of standard setting, labelling, energy audits
and building design.

Renewables

Increase capacity of renewables to 2 080 MW by 2020 and
4 000 MW by 2030.

Transport

Introduce 100 000 electric vehicles by 2020 with 125 000 charging
stations.

Climate change

Reduce GHG intensity of GDP by 35% by 2030 from 2005 level,
increase to 45% reduction with enhanced international support.

Electrification

Achieve total electrification rate of 100% by 2030.

Efficiency

Reduce primary energy demand by 8% by 2030 from 2005 level.

Electrification

Achieve 100% electrification by 2022.

Efficiency

Reduce 40% energy intensity by 2030 from 2010 level.
Decrease energy consumption by 1.6% per year against baseline
forecasts by 2030.

Renewables

Triple the installed capacity of renewables-based power generation
from 2010 level to 15 GW by 2030.

Climate change

Reduce GHG emissions by 70% from BAU level by 2030 with the
condition of international support.

Efficiency

Improve energy intensity by 36% by 2030 from 2005 levels.

Renewables

Increase solar PV capacity to 350 MW by 2020.

Climate change

Reduce GHG emissions by 16% below BAU level by 2020, stabilise
emissions with the aim of peaking around 2030.

Efficiency

Reduce energy intensity by 30% by 2036 from 2010 level.

Renewables

Increase share of renewables in final energy consumption to 30% by

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

2036; increase share of renewables-based power generation
capacity to 20.11%, and share of renewables in transport fuel
consumption to 25.04% by 2036.

Viet Nam

1

Transport

Increase to 1.2 million EVs and 690 charging stations by 2036.

Nuclear

Install nuclear power plants of 2 GW by 2036.

Climate change

Reduce GHG emissions by 20% from BAU level by 2030, increase to
25% with enhanced international support.

Electrification

Ensure most rural households have access to electricity by 2020.

Efficiency

Increase commercial electricity savings to more than 10% of total
power consumption by 2020 relative to BAU.

Renewables

Increase the share of non-hydro renewables-based power
generation capacity to 12.5% by 2025 and 21% by 2030.

Climate change

Reduce GHG emissions from BAU level by 8% by 2030 and by 25%
with international support.

*New energy includes nuclear, hydrogen, coalbed methane, liquefied coal and gasified coal. Traditional use
of biomass is excluded.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Notes: BAU = business-as-usual; GHG = greenhouse gases.

Chapter 1 | Energy in Southeast Asia today

51

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Chapter 2
Southeast Asia’s energy prospects to 2040
Does the future have to look like the past?
H i g h l i ght s

 Energy demand in Southeast Asia continues to grow robustly in the New Policies
Scenario, by two-thirds to 2040, underpinned by a growing economy, demographic
changes and improved access to energy. Oil remains the largest fuel in the region’s
energy mix, but coal is projected to be the largest source of growth, mainly due to
increased use for electricity generation. Natural gas demand also rises, by around
60% to 2040, as its use increases for power and industry. Hydropower and nonhydro renewables grow rapidly, their rise in primary energy offset by the decreased
use of solid biomass as a fuel in the residential sector.

 Rising electricity demand means that power generation more than doubles to 2040,
at a pace twice the global average. Modern coal-fired generation and renewables
account for two-thirds of the large expansion in installed capacity, which reaches
565 GW by 2040. Coal- and gas-fired plants remain the largest sources of power, but
the share of all renewable sources together increases to 30% of the generation mix.
Rising electricity consumption makes reforms to electricity pricing an imperative for
the long-term health of the power sector: without reforms, the cumulative
electricity subsidy bill could reach more than $350 billion to 2040.

 New initiatives to improve efficiency help to constrain growth in end-use energy
consumption by around 10% over the period to 2040. However, there is still ample
untapped potential for further efficiency gains. A growing manufacturing base
means that industrial energy consumption almost doubles by 2040. In the residential
sector, rising household incomes and higher ownership of appliances results in a
near-tripling of electricity use. In transport, around 30 million passenger cars are
added to the fleet by 2040, but limited adoption of fuel-economy standards results
in fuel economy in the region being 20% worse than the global average in 2040.

 The balance between rising demand and stagnant or falling production turns

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Southeast Asia into a significant net importer of energy by 2040. As many oil fields
mature, oil production declines by 30% by 2040, resulting in net imports more than
doubling, to 6.9 mb/d. Despite maintaining gas production at current levels, a strong
increase in demand leads to the region becoming a net gas importer by the mid2020s. Coal production declines slightly, to around 375 Mtce, reflecting policy
decisions in Indonesia to limit production. While Indonesia remains a significant coal
exporter, the region as a whole relies on imports by 2040.

Chapter 2 | Southeast Asia’s energy prospects to 2040

53

2.1

Overview of scenario outcomes1

In the New Policies Scenario, our main scenario, which reflects today’s configuration of
enacted and announced energy policies, Southeast Asia continues to experience robust
growth in primary energy demand, which increases by two-thirds to more than
1 000 million tonnes of oil equivalent (toe) in 2040 (Figure 2.1). A growing population and
rising incomes, as well as strong economic growth and increased electricity access are all
important factors in propelling energy demand higher. However, the pace of energy
demand growth for the next 25 years, which averages around 2.1% per year, is about half
that of the past 25 years, reflecting both a partial structural realignment of the economy in
favour of less energy-intensive sources of growth as well as policies promoting the more
efficient use of energy. By 2040, the region’s economy almost triples in size, growing at a
far faster rate than energy demand, implying a welcome loosening of the links between
energy and economic growth. Energy intensity, measured as the amount of energy
required to produce a unit of gross domestic product (GDP), decreases by around 40% by
2040 compared with today (at an annual average rate of 2%, equivalent to the average
reduction seen worldwide). In the New Policies Scenario, Southeast Asia meets and exceeds
the targets set out in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations Plan of Action for Energy
Cooperation 2016-2025 (APAEC), to reduce energy intensity by 30% by 2025 compared
with 2005 levels (ACE, 2015).
Figure 2.1 ⊳

Primary energy demand in Southeast Asia in the

Mtoe

New Policies Scenario
1 200

Other renewables

1 000

Bioenergy
Hydro

800

Gas

600

Oil
Coal

400
200

2010

2016

2025

2030

2035

2040

Southeast Asia calls on all fuels and technologies to meet demand growth; oil remains the
largest source of energy, while coal use almost triples to 2040

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Note: Mtoe = million tonnes of oil equivalent.

1

See section 1.4.1 in Chapter 1 for a description of the scenarios.

54

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

Among the fuels, coal retains a powerful position in the energy mix and accounts for almost
40% of the growth in primary energy demand between 2016 and 2040 primarily due to its
growing use in electricity generation. However, oil remains the largest source of energy in
Southeast Asia and consumption grows by 40% over the period to 2040. This is the slowest
pace of growth among the fossil fuels, but it is still relatively robust compared with trends
in many other parts of the world. Natural gas consumption also increases strongly, by 60%
to 2040, mainly due to its increased use in industry and power generation. As examined in
more detail later in this chapter, the extent of the projected rise in coal and oil
consumption gives rise to significant environmental and public health concerns, as well as
rising import bills and, in the case of oil, potential energy security issues.
The overall share of renewables in the region’s energy mix slightly decreases to 24% in
2040 (from 26% in 2016). This mostly reflects the continued switch away from solid
biomass in the residential sector, and belies the important dynamic of a tripling in the use
of other renewables (including hydropower, wind and solar photovoltaic) over the period
to 2040. Both of these trends – the reduction in reliance on solid biomass as a traditional
cooking and heating fuel and the rise in modern energy technologies – are positive from
the perspective of Southeast Asia’s sustainable development. Yet, as explored in more
detail later in this Outlook, there is ample potential for both to be accelerated further.
Policies to promote the use of renewable energy in the region, coupled with the falling
costs of solar photovoltaic (PV) and wind, lead to the overall share of renewables (excluding
traditional biomass) increasing slightly from 13% in 2016 to 15% in 2025, but this falls well
short of the aspirational goal of 23% stated in the APAEC.
Table 2.1 ⊳

Key energy indicators for Southeast Asia by scenario
New Policies
Scenario
2016

2025

2040

Current Policies
Scenario

Sustainable
Development
Scenario

2025

2040

2025

2040

Primary energy demand (Mtoe)

643

806

1062

823

1133

732

891

Share of fossil fuels (%)

74%

76%

76%

77%

79%

76%

59%

Final consumption (Mtoe)

453

560

714

570

752

500

584

Electricity demand (TWh)

837

1 214

1 997

1 247

2 105

1 181

1 828

100

81

59

82

63

73

49

100

94

83

98

96

79

26

Energy intensity of GDP
(2016=100)

Carbon intensity of power
(2016=100)

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Note: TWh = terawatt-hour; Mtoe = million tonnes of oil equivalent.

Final energy consumption in Southeast Asia grows by around 60% to 2040 in the New
Policies Scenario (Table 2.1). Growth is strongest in industry, where energy consumption
doubles. Among the fuels, electricity accounts for the largest share of the growth, driven by
rising demand in industry and the residential sector. To keep pace with rising electricity
demand, Southeast Asian countries need to bolster electricity supply infrastructure. In the
Chapter 2 | Southeast Asia’s energy prospects to 2040

55

2

New Policies Scenario, total installed power generation capacity more than doubles,
reaching around 565 gigawatts (GW) by 2040. Thanks to policy developments to incentivise
the use of renewables, around 50% of the net capacity increase comes from low-carbon
sources. This leads to a significantly reduced carbon intensity of power generation, which
decreases by 17% by 2040. In the Sustainable Development Scenario, the share of fossil
fuels in the primary energy mix declines to 60% by 2040 (this share remains constant in the
New Policies Scenario) and the energy system, including all end-use sectors and the power
sector, is put on a pathway towards deep decarbonisation (Box 2.1).
Box 2.1 ⊳

Exploring a deeper transformation of the Southeast Asian
energy system

The World Energy Outlook (WEO) is a multi-scenario analysis, and in addition to the
Current Policies and New Policies scenarios (the latter being the focus for much of our
analysis), another alternative path is presented in the Sustainable Development
Scenario. This new scenario, introduced in WEO-2017, posits a rapid and radical
transformation of the global energy system in a way that is consistent with three major
goals. First, to reduce energy-related CO2 emissions to 2040 in a way that is consistent
with the Paris Agreement, including an early global peak followed by a rapid decline.
Second, to reduce dramatically the energy-related emissions of other pollutants linked
to poor air quality. Third, to ensure universal access to energy by 2030. A
transformation in line with these three targets is challenging and would require
profound additional efforts in across all regions, not least Southeast Asia.
Primary energy mix in Southeast Asia by scenario, 2040

Figure 2.2 ⊳

NPS
1 062 Mtoe

SDS
891 Mtoe
Coal

8%
13%

9%

Oil
26%

3%

24%

Gas

28%

Nuclear

0.4%
21%

Hydro
29%

11%

Bioenergy
Other renewables

5%

22%

1%

© OECD/IEA, 2017

In the Sustainable Development Scenario, the rise in energy demand is slowed by
efficiency policies and the energy mix shifts to more low-carbon sources
Note: NPS = New Policies Scenario; SDS = Sustainable Development Scenario.

56

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

In the Sustainable Development Scenario, carbon-dioxide (CO2) emissions peak in the
next ten years and reach 1.2 gigatonnes (Gt) in 2040, around 6% below the level of
2016. Total primary energy demand increases by around 40% by 2040, but at an annual
growth rate around 35% slower than in the New Policies Scenario, thanks to the more
stringent and broader adoption of efficiency policies. The primary energy mix is much
more decarbonised than in the New Policies Scenario, with the share of renewables
reaching around 40% by 2040 (Figure 2.2).
In the power sector, the share of renewables-based generation reaches almost 65%,
more than half of which is generated by solar PV, geothermal and wind. Among fossil
fuels, coal, a major source of power in the New Policies Scenario, plays a significantly
diminished role, with a share of less than 10% in 2040. In addition, around 8% of coalfired power generation capacity is fitted with carbon capture and storage (CCS)
capabilities. Natural gas is the largest source of power over the Outlook period in the
Sustainable Development Scenario, providing a flexible option to accommodate a larger
share of renewables-based power generation.
In the transport sector, oil continues to play a dominant role, but the sector’s energy
use is more diversified, aided by tighter CO2 emission and fuel-economy standards.
Biofuels, gas and electricity reach shares of 12%, 7% and 5% respectively in transport.
Consequently, in the Sustainable Development Scenario, the number of electric
vehicles, including plug-in hybrids vehicles, reaches 12 million in 2040, roughly 20% of
the total passenger vehicle stock. In the buildings and industry sectors, increased use of
electricity and more stringent efficiency policies, such as the use of energy
management systems and energy audits, help to lower CO2 emissions.

2.2

A closer look at the New Policies Scenario

2.2.1

Outlook for the power sector

Electricity demand

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Electricity demand in Southeast Asia continues its trend of rapid growth in the New Policies
Scenario, more than doubling, to around 2 000 terawatt-hours (TWh) by 2040 (Figure 2.3).
The rate of growth, at an annual average of 3.7%, is roughly twice as fast as the world
average. Per-capita electricity demand also doubles to 2040, but remains around 30%
below the global average in 2040.
The largest contribution to the growth in electricity demand comes from the buildings
sector (residential and services), where electricity demand more than doubles by 2040.
Most of this is residential electricity demand, which grows at an annual average rate of
4.4%; by the late-2030s, this becomes the largest electricity-consuming sector, overtaking
industry. Increased appliance ownership and demand for cooling are the main factors
underpinning this growth, such that by 2040, they account for more than 70% of residential
electricity demand. Industrial demand accounts for around 40% of electricity demand in
Chapter 2 | Southeast Asia’s energy prospects to 2040

57

2

Southeast Asia today and more than doubles, to 725 TWh, in 2040. Reliable electricity
supply constitutes one of the key elements to attracting manufacturing industries, and the
deployment of power generation capacity by independent power producers to supplement
that from state-owned power companies is expected to help increase reliability over the
Outlook period.
Figure 2.3 ⊳

Electricity demand by sector in Southeast Asia in the

TWh

New Policies Scenario
2 000

Agriculture
Services

1 500

Residential
1 000

Transport
Industry

500

2010

2016

2020

2025

2030

2035

2040

Residential electricity demand grows quickly in Southeast Asia, becoming
the largest electricity consumer among end-use sectors by 2040

Among energy-intensive industries, iron and steel production becomes the largest
industrial consumer of electricity, rising at an average annual rate of 4% as production
using electric arc furnaces increases to meet rising steel demand in many sectors such as
infrastructure development and construction. It is non energy-intensive industries,
including the automotive sector and electronics industries, which contribute to the bulk of
the increase in industrial electricity demand, accounting for 70% of industry electricity
demand in 2040.
In Indonesia, electricity demand triples over the period and accounts for one-third of
electricity demand in Southeast Asia in 2040. Electricity demand in the buildings sector
leads the growth, tripling by 2040. Electricity consumption for appliances and cooling
equipment grows rapidly, with the household ownership rate of air conditioners almost
doubling to 17% and that of refrigerators reaching around 90% in 2040.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Electricity supply
To meet rising electricity demand in Southeast Asia, installed generation capacity more
than doubles, to around 565 GW in 2040 (Figure 2.4). The major increase comes from
Indonesia, whose capacity almost triples, to around 180 GW. Renewables-based power
generation capacity makes the largest overall contribution to growth, rising to around
58

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

210 GW in 2040. By the end of the Outlook period, renewables account for around 40%,
the largest share of installed capacity among power generation technologies. Solar PV and
wind generation capacity increases the fastest, reaching a combined capacity of around
75 GW in 2040 from around 5 GW in 2016. This projection reflects the increasingly
widespread policy efforts of various governments to incentivise renewables-based power
generation technologies, including through feed-in tariffs, tax breaks and soft loans.
Hydropower capacity also increases strongly, to around 105 GW in 2040, as a number of
countries, including Lao People’s Democratic Republic (PDR), Cambodia and Myanmar take
advantage of abundant untapped potential. Nuclear capacity is projected to be installed
only later in the period, reflecting development plans in Thailand.
Change in installed electricity generation capacity by type in

Figure 2.4 ⊳

Southeast Asia in the New Policies Scenario, 2016-2040
Coal
Gas
Oil
Hydro
Solar PV
Wind
Other renewables
Nuclear
- 20

0

20

40

60

80

100
GW

Taken together, renewables-based capacity takes the

© OECD/IEA, 2017

largest share of growth followed by coal and gas

Coal-fired plants, whose capacity more than doubles to reach around 160 GW in 2040 make
a large contribution to growth in Southeast Asia’s capacity. The increase in coal-fired
generation reflects the relative affordability of this technology, based on the ample
availability of coal resources in the region, even as costs for some renewable energy
technologies continue to fall. Gas-fired power generation capacity almost doubles to
around 180 GW by 2040, with almost half of the capacity increase coming from Indonesia,
which adds about 40 GW (meaning that more gas-fired power plants are added than coal
capacity in Indonesia). To ensure gas supply to power generators in Indonesia, in 2017, the
government began regulating gas supply allocation and prices of natural gas for domestic
power generators. These regulations set a maximum price for domestically produced gas
and clarify the conditions for power generators to procure indigenous gas or imported
liquefied natural gas (LNG). The government also plans to build a number of LNG receiving
terminals for power generation, including nine floating storage and regasification units by
2030 to provide a source of electricity to remote islands (BPPT, 2016). Oil-fired power
Chapter 2 | Southeast Asia’s energy prospects to 2040

59

2

generation capacity continues to be phased out in Southeast Asia, due to its high cost and
because small diesel plants are replaced by electricity from other sources as the grid
reaches remote areas and other decentralised options become viable (see Chapter 3).
The increased role for coal-fired power plants in our projections raises understandable
questions regarding environmental impacts and efficiency. Currently, around 90% of coalfired power plants in Southeast Asia use subcritical technologies, with an average power
generation efficiency of around 33%. Some countries, notably Indonesia, the Philippines
and Thailand, are prioritising the deployment of more efficient coal-fired power plants,
with Indonesia setting a grid code for the use of efficient coal-fired power generation. In
the New Policies Scenario, supercritical and ultra-supercritical plants with higher efficiency
are gradually introduced, along with integrated coal gasification combined-cycle later in the
projection period. Such efficient coal-fired power generation capacity accounts for around
70% of total new coal capacity additions between 2016 and 2040, such that in 2040 the
more efficient plants are about a half of total installed coal capacity. However, challenges
remain to expand coal-fired capacity, not least public opposition in some countries.
Additional challenges involve financing the high upfront costs (when many international
development banks are limiting lending to coal projects) and ensuring availability of skilled
operators to achieve efficient output in plant operation.

TWh

Figure 2.5 ⊳

Electricity generation by type in Southeast Asia in the
New Policies Scenario

100%

Other renewables
Bioenergy

80%

Hydro
Nuclear
Gas

60%

Oil
Coal

40%
20%

2010

2016

2025

2030

2035

2040

The power generation mix gradually diversifies,

© OECD/IEA, 2017

with the share of renewables reaching 30% by 2040

The efforts by governments across Southeast Asia to rebalance the generation fuel mix
achieve some success in the New Policies Scenario (Figure 2.5). Electricity generation more
than doubles to around 2 200 TWh in 2040. It continues to be dominated by fossil fuels
though their share declines by twelve percentage points, to 70%, in 2040. Coal accounts for
44% of the increase in power generation between 2016 and 2040 to become the primary
60

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

fuel for power generation in the region, overtaking natural gas. Reflecting recent policy
developments that favour renewables and the multiple challenges in building coal-fired
plants, the contribution of coal in the power generation mix in 2040 is lower by almost ten
percentage points at 40% than in our Southeast Asia Energy Outlook-2015 (IEA, 2015).
Gas-fired power generation also increases, by around 60% by 2040, but its share of the
total mix decreases to 28%, partly reflecting plans adopted by some governments, such as
Malaysia, Thailand and Viet Nam, to reduce reliance on gas for power generation. Oil is the
only source of power generation that declines, due to its high cost. Yet in remote areas,
small diesel generators continue to play a role, albeit a diminishing one, in providing
electricity.
Reflecting the upward adjustment favouring renewables in some countries’ power
development plans as well as policy support such as feed-in tariffs widely adopted in the
region, the share of renewables in the power generation mix increases to around 30% in
2040. The rising share of renewables-based generation is driven by hydro, whose
generation almost triples by 2040, to around 350 TWh. Non-hydro renewables-based
power generation also grows rapidly, accounting for 14% of the total power generation in
2040. Solar PV and wind power generation grows especially quickly, at an annual average
rate of around 15% between 2016 and 2040. Geothermal power generation almost triples
by 2040, reflecting its substantial potential in some parts of Southeast Asia and supportive
government policies, particularly in Indonesia and the Philippines.

Electricity subsidies
Southeast Asian countries provide a range of subsidies for consumers, including by setting
lower input prices and providing tax exemptions for fuels used in power generation, and
setting end-user prices below the cost of supply with the gap met by the treasury, stateowned utility or other customer categories. Many countries also subsidise electricity for
low-income households with lifeline rates.2 Types of subsidies vary among countries. For
example, in the Philippines, subsidies are provided through a cross-subsidy scheme in areas
where the private sector is not able to provide electricity at an affordable cost.
Many Southeast Asian countries have undertaken pricing reforms on oil products used in
transport (see section 1.3.2 in Chapter 1). Rapid increases in residential electricity demand
have raised awareness of the need to reform the subsidies, but political sensitivity and
public reaction to rising electricity prices has often hampered sustained and consistent
subsidy reforms in the region.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

As discussed in Chapter 1, many Southeast Asian countries – including Indonesia, Malaysia,
Thailand, and Viet Nam – have made progress in gradually removing electricity subsidies.
However, there have been cases in the region, as well as in many other parts of the world,
where subsidies have been reintroduced and the move towards complete removal of
2

Lifeline rates provide a minimum level of electricity at a favourable tariff for low-income households. The
threshold consumption level differs among countries in Southeast Asia, but the tariffs are typically set at
below electricity supply cost.

Chapter 2 | Southeast Asia’s energy prospects to 2040

61

2

subsidies has stalled or even reversed course. To consider the financial impact of such a
reversal, we have analysed a case in which countries across the region do not continue
reform on electricity subsidies. Assuming the same demand trajectory as in the New
Policies Scenario, if the level of subsidies to total cost of electricity supply are kept constant,
the electricity subsidy bill would amount to over $20 billion in 2040 (Figure 2.6). This is
equal to 4% of total government revenue in Southeast Asia in 2015 and the cumulative
subsidy bills to 2040 would rise to more than $350 billion.
Figure 2.6 ⊳

Residential electricity subsidies in Southeast Asia without

Billion dollars (2016)

pricing reforms
25
20
15
10
5

2016

2025

2030

2040

Without reforms, the annual cost of subsidising electricity bills
in Southeast Asia could exceed $20 billion by 2040

To further promote subsidy reforms, some Southeast Asian countries that are members of
multilateral groups, such as the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) and the G20, can
benefit from peer reviews that can help rationalise their subsidy schemes. There also are
notable examples in Southeast Asia where subsidy reforms have been sustained. One
instance is in the Philippines, which undertook subsidy reforms in the late 1990s, starting
with the deregulation of prices for oil products. Despite political pressures to reinstate
subsidies, the government has sustained the reforms. A public communication campaign
led by the president and a special committee composed of relevant stakeholders analysed
the need for subsidies and highlighted the importance of the reforms, which facilitated
public consent for the subsidy reform.

2.2.2

End-use sectors

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Overview
Reflecting economic development and demographic changes, final energy consumption in
Southeast Asia grows by around 60% to 2040 in the New Policies Scenario, at an annual
average rate of 1.9% (Table 2.2), around 70% faster than the world average. Among the
62

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

end-use sectors, industry grows the fastest, becoming the largest energy consumer in the
early 2020s. Oil remains the largest energy source, its position upheld by an ongoing
dominance in the transport sector, which accounts for around 60% of the oil consumed.
Electricity is the largest contributor to demand growth between 2016 and 2040, as the
robust economy and urbanisation increase electricity demand in the buildings and industry
sectors. Bioenergy decreases its share in final consumption, from 25% to 13%, as more and
more people gain access to modern energy, replacing traditional biomass.
Table 2.2 ⊳

Final energy consumption by sector in Southeast Asia in the
New Policies Scenario
Shares

2016-2040

2000

2016

2025

2030

2040

2016

2040

Industry

76

129

176

202

255

29%

36%

126

2.9%

Transport

61

123

157

170

186

27%

26%

63

1.7%

Buildings

108

149

161

170

193

33%

27%

45

1.1%

30

52

68

72

79

11%

11%

27

1.8%

276

453

560

614

714

100%

100%

261

1.9%

96

163

221

251

310

n.a.

n.a.

147

2.7%

Other sectors**
Total
Industry, incl.
transformation***

Change CAAGR*

*Compound average annual growth rate. ** Includes agriculture and non-energy use. *** Includes energy
demand from blast furnaces and coke ovens (not part of final consumption), and petrochemical feedstocks.
Note: n.a. = not applicable.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

To address fast-rising energy demand, Southeast Asian countries are increasingly pursuing
energy efficiency policies and have agreed on a collective efficiency target of reducing
energy intensity by 30% by 2025 compared with 2005 level, in addition to national targets
in some countries. A few countries, such as Philippines and Thailand, have gone further,
adopting extensive energy efficiency policies under comprehensive national energy
efficiency plans. However, across the region, the degree of implementation of efficiency
policies varies significantly. For example, many appliances such as air conditioners,
refrigerators, and television sets are covered by energy-efficient labelling schemes in
Thailand and in Viet Nam, while other countries such as Cambodia, Lao PDR and Myanmar
have not yet introduced efficiency labelling schemes. These countries often lack the
institutional resources and capabilities necessary to implement efficiency policies, including
data collection as a basis to measure consumption and save energy, as their resources are
often directed towards other policy priorities, such as extending electricity access.
End-user energy demand 3 would be around 10% higher in 2040 without efficiency
improvements associated with the efficiency policies currently in place, as well as those
announced as intended targets, compared with what is seen in the New Policies Scenario
(Figure 2.7). The impact of efficiency savings grows over time, suggesting that earlier action
bears more fruit in the future. Achieving these benefits involves efforts to collect reliable
3

End-user energy demand here includes demand from blast furnaces and coke ovens, and petrochemical
feedstocks for industry.

Chapter 2 | Southeast Asia’s energy prospects to 2040

63

2

energy data, raise consumer awareness, effectively enforce standards, build institutional
capacity and finance additional upfront cost for efficient equipment.

Mtoe

Figure 2.7 ⊳

Contribution of efficiency improvements in end-use energy
consumption in Southeast Asia in the New Policies Scenario

1 000

Efficiency
savings

800

Energy
demand

600
400
200

2016

2025

2030

2035

2040

Without efficiency improvements, energy demand would be around 10% higher in 2040
Note: The amount of energy efficiency savings reflects the cumulative effect of efficiency savings in all enduse sectors in the New Policies Scenario, based on a decomposition analysis of projected demand.

Industry4

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Industrial energy demand in Southeast Asia grows rapidly in the New Policies Scenario,
almost doubling to 2040 to around 310 million tonnes of oil equivalent (Mtoe). This reflects
the large and growing role manufacturing industries play in the region, buoyed by
considerable foreign direct investments, which totalled around $30 billion in 2015. A
number of industries, including automobile and electric appliance manufacturing, steel and
chemicals production are playing a prominent role in economic growth.
Energy-intensive industries, including steel, chemicals, cement, paper and aluminium,
account for roughly half of total industrial energy demand throughout the period to 2040.
In all of these industries except steel, energy intensity (expressed as the amount of energy
needed per tonne of output), continues to decline over the period. The steel industry in
Southeast Asia is an exception because to date it largely employed electric arc furnaces
using recycled steel. With demand rising for steel products for infrastructure, construction
and other manufacturing industries, countries such as Indonesia and Viet Nam plan to build
blast furnace technologies for primary steel production. Blast furnaces consume more
energy per unit of production than electric arc furnaces, and therefore will contribute to
the overall energy intensity in the steel industry increasing in the period to 2040.
4

Energy demand in industry in this section also includes blast furnaces, coke ovens and petrochemical
feedstocks.

64

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

Demand for natural gas in the industry sector more than doubles by 2040, accounting for
around 30% of industrial energy consumption in 2040. Among the end-use sectors, industry
has been by far the largest gas consumer and this trend continues, accounting for around
80% of end-user natural gas consumption in 2040. Demand for electricity in industry more
than doubles, to around 730 TWh in 2040, gaining prominence in a wide range of areas
such as automobiles and electric appliance manufacturing. In many Southeast Asian
countries where manufacturing plays an important role in the economy, reliable electricity
supply is a key factor to industrial development. Some countries such as Thailand take
advantage of gas-fired cogeneration plants installed at industrial parks or factories to
ensure reliable heat and electricity supply, and the government plans for cogeneration
plants to account for about 11% of total new installed electrical capacity between 2015 and
2026. Coal consumption more than doubles to 2040, partly due to the increased use of
blast furnaces in the steel industry, which accounts for one-third of the rise. Oil
consumption also expands, particularly for petrochemical feedstocks. The share of oil in
industrial energy consumption, however, declines from one-third in 2016 to one-quarter in
2040, reflecting a continued switch to natural gas from fuel oil.
The profile of energy demand in Southeast Asia changes due to shifts in industrial activity,
fuel and technology switching and efficiency improvements. We conducted a
decomposition analysis that illustrates the relative contributions of these factors to
changes in energy demand. All else being equal, the rise in industrial activity would increase
energy demand by around 130% in the period 2016 to 2040. However, in our projections,
this growth is tempered by energy efficiency improvements that moderate the growth in
industrial demand, enabling a saving of around 50 Mtoe in 2040 (Figure 2.8).
Figure 2.8 ⊳

Contributing factors to changes in industry energy demand

Mtoe

in Southeast Asia in the New Policies Scenario
400

Fuel and
technology
switching

300

Efficiency
savings

200

Energy service
demand

100

© OECD/IEA, 2017

2016

2040
Energy demand in industry rises rapidly,

but efficiency improvements help moderate the growth

Chapter 2 | Southeast Asia’s energy prospects to 2040

65

2

Although energy efficiency can provide a powerful tool to enhance energy security and
address environmental concerns at the same time, the effective implementation of policies
often faces considerable challenges, including lack of resources and capabilities and
insufficient enforcement. In many Southeast Asian countries, incentive programmes are
being implemented to encourage industry to invest in energy-efficient equipment, but a
regulatory approach, such as minimum energy performance standards to limit consumption
is weak. For example, so far only Malaysia and Thailand implements minimum energy
performance standards for electric motors, while Indonesia and Singapore have plans to
introduce them near future. A broader adoption of minimum energy standards for electric
motors (which consume more than half of the world’s electricity) can play an important
role in moderating the growth in industrial energy consumption.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

The majority of industrial energy efficiency programmes involve energy audits, an essential
tool to understand energy use and efficiency potentials. The most well known is the
ISO 50001 for energy management, which was developed through a collaborative process
involving hundreds of experts from around the world over many years. Successful
implementation of ISO 50001, or any audit programme, requires a process for training and
maintaining the performance of qualified auditors through, for example, an accreditation
programme. Raising awareness of the importance of efficiency and addressing the resource
constraints are primary challenges for Southeast Asian countries. Only half of the ten
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) members have so far introduced energy
management systems in industry (ECCJ, 2017). The infrastructure necessary for such an
initiative is considerable, so sharing resources across the ASEAN members could be useful.
A collective approach has been initiated under the ASEAN Plan of Action for Energy
Cooperation to share best practice and policy experience and various multilateral efforts to
co-operate to enhance capacity building, such as the APEC energy efficiency peer review
scheme.
Energy audit programmes need to be packaged with reporting requirements, targeted
information that helps industries understand how they can save energy and where they can
get assistance. The more successful programmes also provide some form of incentive, for
example access to preferential loans or tax exemptions. For instance, in Japan, mandatory
reporting requirements and annual efficiency improvement requirements are bolstered by
a tax incentive in the form of accelerated depreciation for efficient equipment. India’s
Perform Achieve Trade Scheme is another successful example of a packaged approach to
industrial energy efficiency that is relevant to Southeast Asia. This programme starts with
an audit process to understand the specific site energy consumption from which targets are
set across a specific industrial subsector with the best performing sites having the least to
achieve and the worst ones having higher targets. Firms can comply with the targets by
achieving energy savings, or if they over achieve they can sell credits, which can be
purchased by under-achieving firms. The latest assessment of 427 firms shows that the
original targets were surpassed with energy consumption reduced by 5.3% (IEA, 2016).

66

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

Transport
Southeast Asian countries continue to experience rapid growth in transport demand, with
the number of passenger light-duty vehicles increasing by around 70% by 2040 in the New
Policies Scenario, to around 62 million, a stock roughly equivalent to that of Japan today.
Indonesia accounts for around 70% of the growth, as the passenger vehicle stock triples to
around 28 million in 2040, accounting for 45% of the Southeast Asian total. Rising incomes,
underpinned by economic growth and improvements in road infrastructure, push projected
passenger vehicle ownership higher across the region, which increase by more than 40% to
81 per 1 000 habitants in 2040. This level of ownership remains far below that of the global
average in 2040, which is around 220 per 1 000 habitants.
Against this backdrop, and with industrial output also increasing demand for freight, there
is strong demand for transport fuels. Overall transport energy demand increases by 50% to
2040 and oil continues to meet around 90% of transport-related demand. Oil consumption
for transport rises by around 1.1 million barrels per day (mb/d). Use of bioenergy as an
alternative to oil increases gradually and accounts for around 5% of road transport demand
by 2040. In 2040, there are about 4 million electric cars in a total passenger vehicle stock of
62 million, but electricity accounts for only 1% of transport energy demand. Some
Southeast Asian countries have set targets for electric vehicles, notably Malaysia
(100 000 electric cars, 2 000 electric buses and 125 000 charging stations by 2020) and
Thailand (1.2 million passenger electric vehicles by 2036). Indonesia recently announced a
plan to encourage the introduction of electric vehicles. The adoption of electric vehicles,
however, is projected to grow slowly in the New Policies Scenario, as policy support to
encourage consumer uptake and the necessary recharging infrastructure is still relatively
weak.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

The strong linkages between the services provided by road freight services and increased
economic activity mean that the volume of goods transported by road freight (measured in
tonne-kilometres) more than doubles from 2016 levels by 2040. This accounts for about 7%
of the global growth in road freight activity. Consequently, energy demand for road freight
increases by around 60% by 2040, accounting for around 50% of oil demand for road
transport. Energy demand for passenger vehicles also rises strongly, by around 60% to
2040.
The number of two/three-wheelers continues to expand, accounting for three-quarters of
the total vehicle stock and more than 20% of energy consumption in road transport in
2040. More and more of these vehicles raise concerns about traffic congestion and air
pollution. Some countries in the region are taking policy actions. For example, Hanoi City,
Viet Nam, plans to ban motorcycles by 2030 in an effort to alleviate traffic and air pollution
problems. Motorcycles have been banned in some streets in Jakarta, Indonesia since 2014
and there are plans to expand the scope of the ban. In Thailand, the government intends
to replace 22 000 old tuk-tuks (a popular three-wheel vehicle) with electric tuk-tuks,
supported by funding from the Energy Conservation Promotion Fund (EPPO, 2017). China
provides a good example in transforming from internal combustion engine models of
motorcycles to electric ones, with over 200 million electric motorcycles in 2015 (IEA, 2017a).
Chapter 2 | Southeast Asia’s energy prospects to 2040

67

2

Energy demand in aviation sees an annual growth rate of around 4% – twice the global
average – to almost triple the demand in the 2016 to 2040 period. Increased economic
activity and wealth in the region boosts demand for air travel. In addition, the collective
efforts to promote the aviation industry contribute to the increase, such as through the
ASEAN Single Market Initiative, which aims to increase the safe and secure movement of
people, goods and services.
Southeast Asia continues to be dependent on oil imports, which increase to around
6.9 mb/d in 2040 in the New Policies Scenario. Action in the transport sector, the largest
oil-consuming sector by far, can play a vital role in mitigating oil security risks and reducing
import bills. Many governments in Southeast Asia have introduced measures to improve
efficiency in the transport sector, such as by introducing tax incentives to purchase vehicles
with higher efficiency, but currently only Viet Nam has established a fuel-economy
standard. This standard is applicable only for cars with up to seven seats, but based on a
prime minister’s directive issued in 2017, the coverage will be expanded to vehicles with up
to nine seats. Singapore has a fuel labelling and an emissions scheme including CO2
emission limits to provide rebates or impose surcharges on vehicles purchases. Thailand
also introduced a CO2 tax-based incentive scheme and a labelling programme that rates the
fuel economy of passenger cars. Brunei Darussalam, Indonesia, the Philippines and
Thailand currently are discussing plans to introduce fuel-economy standards. In the New
Policies Scenario, the limited adoption of fuel-economy standards largely explains why this
indicator in Southeast Asian countries lags behind the global trend, with average fuel
economy of passenger vehicles in the region 20% lower than the global average in 2040
(Figure 2.9).
Figure 2.9 ⊳

Passenger light-duty vehicle stock and fuel economy in

80

12

60

9

40

6

litres/100 km

Million vehicles

Southeast Asia in the New Policies Scenario
Southeast Asia
PLDV stock
Fuel economy
(right axis):
Southeast Asia
World
20

3

© OECD/IEA, 2017

2016

2025

2030

2035

2040

The passenger light-duty vehicle stock expands to 62 million in 2040, but improvements in
fuel economy lag behind the global trend
Note: PLDV = passenger light-duty vehicle.

68

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

More widespread adoption of mandatory fuel-economy standards for both freight and
passenger vehicles can help Southeast Asian countries to mitigate a number of energy
security and environmental concerns. Countries can take advantage of ongoing
international co-operation to share best practices and information in shaping and
implementing the policy. One of the approaches could be to work with the Global Fuel
Economy Initiative on vehicle efficiency standards. This collaborative project, in which the
International Energy Agency is a partner, helps dozens of countries around the world
benefit from improved vehicle efficiency. As well as reducing oil consumption and thereby
improving energy security, there are significant local air pollution benefits such as improved
health and reduced costs to both the public and private purses due to ill health. Similarly,
collaborative work on two/three-wheeler efficiency could be accelerated in Southeast Asia.
Globally, there has been much less work done on efficiency of heavy-duty vehicles but a
relevant global movement is starting and Southeast Asia could collaborate early on and
help shape the process. The region can benefit from multilateral efforts to rein in rising oil
demand of road freight, such as those in the Green Freight Asia Alliance where half the
ASEAN countries are the members (IEA, 2017b). Seizing the most promising opportunities
in this realm would require data sharing and collaboration across companies, with
substantial hurdles to transforming the status quo of shipping and road freight operations.
As Southeast Asia is urbanising rapidly, consideration also needs to be given to improving
public transport so that it is an attractive alternative to individual transport modes. Some
countries in Southeast Asia are taking actions to alleviate urban traffic congestions by
developing mass transit networks, e.g. Indonesia and Viet Nam. In Thailand, the Bangkok
Mass Transport system is being built as a part of a broader transport infrastructure strategy
to support a modal shift away from road to rail. It entails the expansion and improvement
of a railway network, for which around 80% of the planned investment totalling around
$67 billion will be spent by 2020 (APERC, 2015).

Buildings5

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Economic development and expanded access to modern energy has a major impact on
quality of life and leads to steady increases of energy consumption across Southeast Asia in
the residential sector. In addition to industry, the services sector is a leading source of the
region’s economic growth such that its energy consumption more than doubles to around
50 Mtoe in 2040. Overall, energy demand in the buildings sector grows by about 30% to
2040. The increase is somewhat moderated by the fall in consumption of traditional
biomass (a very inefficient form of consumption), whose share in the fuel mix in the
residential sector decreases from 70% to around 40%. Improved infrastructure and rising
incomes enable people to switch from the use of traditional biomass to electricity, natural
gas and liquefied petroleum gas (LPG), and reduce the risks of indoor air pollution.
Residential LPG consumption grows by around 30% by 2040.
5

The buildings sector includes energy used in residential, commercial and institutional buildings, and nonspecified other.

Chapter 2 | Southeast Asia’s energy prospects to 2040

69

2

Electricity consumption in the residential sector almost triples by 2040, to around 760 TWh
(Figure 2.10) with increased appliance ownership accounting for more than half of
residential electricity consumption in 2040. In Cambodia, television ownership per
household doubled between 2000 and 2015 to 67%, while in Viet Nam, the number
reached 100% in 2014, up from 62% in 2000. In the New Policies Scenario, rising incomes
extend these trends for a range of household appliances. Residential electricity demand is
also on the upswing to power air conditioners, whose market is widening rapidly in many
Southeast Asian countries, for instance it has tripled in the last five years in Viet Nam (JRAIA,
2017). Across the region, ownership of air conditioners spreads from 17% of households in
2016 to around 30% by 2040 and electricity demand to run them more than triples.
Electricity demand per household continues to increase over the period to 2040 to around
3 300 kilowatt-hours (kWh) per year, a level approaching to the world average.
Figure 2.10 ⊳ Residential electricity demand by end-use in Southeast Asia in

4 000

800

3 000

600

kWh

TWh

the New Policies Scenario
Cooling
Appliances
Lighting
Cooking
2 000

400

Water heating
Space heating

1 000

200

Electricity demand per
dwelling (right axis)
Southeast Asia

2010

2016

2025

2030

2035

2040

World

Electricity consumption almost triples by 2040, pushed higher by
increased ownership of a range of appliances and air conditioners

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Note: kWh = kilowatt-hour.

Robust growth in electricity consumption has made policy-makers in the region recognise
the need to introduce or reinforce efficiency policies to moderate demand growth,
especially for appliances. Many governments in the region have established minimum
efficiency performance standards (MEPS) and labelling schemes for appliances, though
their product coverage and efficiency thresholds of the standards and labelling vary.
Thailand, which was the first ASEAN member country to introduce MEPS, has established
standards for 26 appliances, while similar measures are still under development in
countries such as Cambodia and Myanmar. Expanding product coverages for MEPS and
efficiency labelling, together with frequent updates of the efficiency threshold, are
expected to further promote energy savings. To this end, efforts among Southeast Asian
70

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

countries have already started. In 2015, Indonesia introduced a labelling program for air
conditioners. In 2017, Viet Nam issued a prime minister’s directive to revise the efficiency
labelling and MEPs to include items such as light-emitting diodes (LEDs) and water heaters.
Southeast Asian countries can benefit from international collaboration programmes on
appliance efficiency. For example, the IEA 4E Technology Collaboration Programme (IEA4E), which was established in 2008 helps ensure that similar energy performance standards
apply in various markets in the world. Southeast Asian countries are in a position to
emulate this experience and have taken the first steps through a programme known as
ASEAN Shine where region-wide air-conditioner standards have been developed. While the
programme is making progress, the agreed performance levels could be strengthened to
move the market more expeditiously. Two problems with the air-conditioner standards are
the ability of manufacturers to produce air conditioners to performance standards that vary
across the region and a reluctance on the part of the manufacturers to be regulated for
energy performance standards in their products. For energy efficiency standards and
labelling programmes to be successful, they need to be forged in partnership between
relevant government entities and manufacturers and retailers. There are many examples of
where this approach has been successful. For example, the Thai air conditioning industry
saw the opportunity of producing efficient equipment for an expanded market based on
regional standards and became a major exporter. In India, a publicly owned energy service
company, known as Energy Efficiency Services Limited, ran a series of bulk procurements
for high quality LEDs under a prime minister’s initiative. This resulted in the price of
procured LED bulbs decreasing to around one-quarter of the original price (Energy Efficency
Services Limited, 2016), leading to more than 100 million LED bulbs delivered across the
country (EESL and IEA, 2017). Such examples illustrate the shared benefits that a welldesigned programme can deliver to moderate energy demand while supplying an energy
service, provide wider markets for the appliances and goods and also stimulate jobs in the
manufacturing sector.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

In the services sector, electricity accounts for around 80% of energy demand in 2040, of
which lighting and appliances account for around 70%. Similar to households, the rising
electricity demand in the services sector highlights the need for rigorous efficiency policies
for appliances to moderate energy demand growth.
Policies, measures and practices dedicated to efficient energy consumption in buildings
also need to be strengthened. Successful energy efficiency programmes for buildings take a
packaged approach as the elements strengthen each other. The first element is building
codes and whether they include MEPS for new buildings. Five of the ten ASEAN countries
have either voluntary or mandatory building efficiency codes, but enforcement is
insufficient. There is a vast market for new buildings in the region and as they last for
decades, this is a critical area. Collaboration on regional standards can foster shared
resources and knowledge, and widen markets for building materials and services. The
second element is having a system to address existing buildings. One methodology rates
buildings’ energy profiles with skilled and accredited assessors to regularly verify that
Chapter 2 | Southeast Asia’s energy prospects to 2040

71

2

standards are maintained. Once the rating system is in place it can be used in a range of
ways, for example to label buildings so that buyers or renters better understand what their
operating costs will be. Ratings can be established for different building types such as
offices, shopping centres, hospitals and schools. There is evidence that this approach can
successfully drive improvements in the efficiency of buildings.
As with appliance standards, there is ample experience that can benefit the process to
accelerate efficiency gains in the region’s buildings sector. For example, Australia’s building
codes have been evolving to accommodate a variety of climates regimes, many of which
are relevant to Southeast Asia. Australia’s experience could be informative to accelerate
the process of establishing region-wide building codes, which have been under discussion
among ASEAN members for some time. The assessment tool for commercial buildings in
Australia is known as NABERS and it is used to label buildings in the Commercial Buildings
Disclosure Programme (CBD). CBD is an integral part of the Green Lease Programme that
clearly lays out the responsibilities of property owners and tenants in terms of energy
efficiency. Government office buildings have to be of certain performance levels according
to the NABERS scheme and this applies both to government-owned and rented space.
Australia’s experience and packaged approach is not unique, but it is particularly relevant
to Southeast Asia in terms of proximity and climate.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

In most countries going through rapid urbanisation, like many of the Southeast Asian
countries, energy demand for municipal energy services also rises rapidly and as new
systems are being put in place this is an ideal time to make energy-efficient choices rather
than locking in less efficient systems with excessive operating costs, potentially for
decades. Street lighting, water treatment and distribution systems, and sewage treatment
are all major costs for municipal government budgets and areas where design choices can
have long-term implications for energy consumption. Efficient systems can yield major
savings using efficient components such as lightings, high efficiency pumps paired with
variable speed drives where appropriate, and automated control systems to match variable
demand. There are also energy efficiency opportunities in specific types of building often
managed by local authorities such as schools and hospitals.
Collaboration among the Southeast Asian governments to develop benchmarks related to
energy aspects of public services can provide useful lessons and accelerate efficiency gains.
For instance, there is a wealth of experience in technical and financing issues related to
street lighting. So rather than devising new specifications, established standards for similar
climatic conditions could be adopted to accelerate the process in Southeast Asia. India’s
experience with Energy Efficiency Services Limited could be adapted for street lighting and
other equipment needed for municipal services such as motors, pumps and control
systems. The public sector should lead by example and require all levels of government to
procure cost-effective high efficiency systems when using public money. This approach has
successfully driven markets to produce more efficient goods in many parts of the world. A
well-known example is Energy Star, initiated as a voluntary labelling programme in the
United States; it is an international standard for energy-efficient consumer products.
72

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

2.3

Outlook by fuel in the New Policies Scenario

Southeast Asia’s energy supply and demand dynamics change measurably in the New
Policies Scenario to 2040. Decreasing production output of oil and the strong increase in
demand for all fossil fuels means that Southeast Asia, long accustomed to being a
considerable net exporter of energy, turns into a prominent net importer, with the oil
import requirement growing strongly (Table 2.3). Our price trajectories for fossil fuels in
this scenario play a major role in shaping these trends: since our Southeast Asia Energy
Outlook in 2015, the global price trajectories for oil and natural gas in the New Policies
Scenario have been revised downwards. This has added some impetus to demand trends in
the region, while complicating the prospects for new supply projects, particularly over the
period to 2025.6
Table 2.3 ⊳

Energy production and primary energy demand by fuel
in Southeast Asia in the New Policies Scenario
2016-2040

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Oil production

Unit

2000

2016

2025

2030

2040

Delta CAAGR*

Mtoe

140

118

100

94

79

-39

-1.7%

mb/d

2.9

2.5

2.1

2.0

1.7

-0.8

-1.6%

Oil demand

Mtoe

156

220

270

288

308

88

1.4%

mb/d

3.1

4.7

5.8

6.2

6.6

1.8

1.4%

Natural gas production

Mtoe

135

188

167

172

185

-4

bcm

159

223

198

204

217

-6

-0.1%

Natural gas demand

Mtoe

74

141

162

180

225

84

2.0%

bcm

88

170

195

216

269

99

1.9%

Coal production

Mtoe

58

278

276

263

262

-16

-0.2%

Mtce

83

397

394

376

375

-23

-0.2%

Coal demand

Mtoe
Mtce

32
45

112
161

176
252

208
297

271
387

159
227

3.7%
3.7%

Nuclear

Mtoe

0

0

0

0

4

4

n.a.

Renewables

Mtoe

123

169

197

217

253

85

1.7%

-0.1%

Hydropower

Mtoe

4

11

17

23

30

19

4.4%

Bioenergy

Mtoe

101

129

132

132

136

6

0.2%

Other renewables

Mtoe

18

28

49

62

88

59

4.8%

Total production

Mtoe

456

753

741

746

783

30

0.2%

Total demand**

Mtoe

414

708

890

988

1 186

478

2.2%

Net trade
Share of net trade

Mtoe

43

45

-149

-242

-403

n.a.

n.a.

%

9%

6%

-17%

-24%

-34%

n.a.

n.a.

* CAAGR = compound average annual growth rate. ** Takes into account demand for bunker fuels
(international marine and aviation). For nuclear and renewables, supply is equal to demand. Notes: mb/d =
million barrels per day; bcm = billion cubic metres; Mtce = million tonnes of coal equivalent; Mtoe = million
tonnes of oil equivalent. Excludes bunkers.
6

See Chapter 1 of the World Energy Outlook-2017 (to be released 14 November 2017) for more details on oil
price movements.

Chapter 2 | Southeast Asia’s energy prospects to 2040

73

2

The share of renewables in the primary energy mix decreases slightly, to 24%, despite a
significant increase in the use of wind and solar power, with the decline reflecting mostly
changes in the use of biomass, which currently accounts for around one-fifth of primary
energy demand. In the New Policies Scenario, the role of biomass shifts in several ways; it
declines in residential use and is replaced by electricity, and natural gas and LPG, while
biomass use for power generation increases, suggesting a more efficient use of bioenergy
(including through the combustion of biofuels).

2.3.1

Oil

Resources and production
Southeast Asia’s oil production declines in the period to 2040 as decreasing production in
Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand are not fully offset by rises in Brunei Darussalam and the
Philippines. By 2040, total oil production falls to 1.7 mb/d, a 30% drop on today’s level
(Figure 2.11).

mb/d

Figure 2.11 ⊳ Oil production in Southeast Asia in the New Policies Scenario
2.5

Other
Thailand

2.0

Viet Nam
Malaysia

1.5

Indonesia
1.0
0.5

2016

2025

2030

2035

2040

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Oil production is in steady decline to 2040 as fields in Indonesia and Malaysia mature

Indonesia, currently Southeast Asia’s biggest oil producer, had proven reserves of
3.3 billion barrels at end-2016. Of the 880 kb/d in production in 2016, over 90% came from
the Sumatra, Java and East Kalimantan basins, the most widely explored in the country
(Table 2.4). Declines in the onshore Duri and Minas fields and lack of sizeable new
prospects (an issue compounded by a drop in activity in recent years due to the relatively
low oil price environment) have seen oil production fall by around half since its peak in
1991. In our projections, Indonesia’s oil output is projected to continue to fall, reaching
about 510 kb/d in 2040, as new sources of production, enhanced oil recovery (EOR)
projects and the assumed start of coal-to-liquids production are able to slow, but not fully
offset, continued decline.
74

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

New developments in Indonesia are limited in the short and medium term. The Cepu Block
in East and Central Java, containing 720 million barrels of recoverable liquids, is Indonesia’s
most recent major development. Peak production at the Banyu Urip and Kedung Keris
fields on the block, operated by Pertamina, the national oil company, and ExxonMobil, was
originally planned at 165 kb/d, but this was surpassed in 2016 by around 20 kb/d, with the
operators now planning to boost production further to 205 kb/d. The performance of the
Cepu Block fields helped offset, to some extent, the decline in other fields and allowed
Indonesia to register its first year-on-year increase in oil production in six years. The
modest pipeline of projects in the medium term, including the Jambaran and Tiung Biru
fields, focus on the Cepu block, but East Natuna, a gas project in the South China Sea (if
development goes ahead, see next section), could be a significant source of natural gas
liquids (NGLs), while East Indonesia includes large frontier areas that are relatively
unexplored and may contain significant potential. Uncertainty over the development of
East Natuna stems from the extremely high carbon-dioxide content of the field.
Table 2.4 ⊳

Oil resources by country, end-2016 (billion barrels)
Proven
reserves

Remaining technically
recoverable resources

Technically
recoverable
resources

Remaining as share of
technically recoverable
resources

Brunei Darussalam

1.1

5.0

8.9

56%

Indonesia

3.3

38.2

63.7

60%

Malaysia

3.6

15.3

24.2

63%

Philippines

0.1

1.5

1.7

90%

Thailand

0.4

2.9

5.4

53%

Viet Nam

4.4

10.9

13.6

80%

Rest of Southeast Asia

0.1

4.8

5.5

88%

Total Southeast Asia

13.1

78.7

123

64%

Notes: Proven reserves are usually defined as discovered volumes having a 90% probability that they can be
extracted profitably. Technically recoverable resources comprise cumulative production, proven reserves,
reserves growth (the projected increase in reserves in known fields) and as yet undiscovered resources that
are judged likely to be ultimately producible using current technology. Remaining technically recoverable
resources are equal to the technically recoverable resources less cumulative production.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Sources: IEA databases and analysis; BGR (2016); OGJ (2016); USGS (2012a, 2012b); BP (2017); US
DOE/EIA/ARI (2013, 2014).

Slowing Indonesia’s decline in oil output will require the execution of more complex,
expensive projects, including EOR. Chevron employs EOR to slow decline in both the Minas
and Duri fields, for example, with the steam injection project in the Duri field being one of
the largest in the world. An enabling environment is crucial to incentivise EOR investments,
which could be strengthened by, for instance, agreeing a variation on a production sharing
contract that assigns a portion of the secondary recovery to the investing party, while
keeping primary production in the hands of Pertamina. In early 2017, Indonesia introduced
a “Gross Split Production Sharing Contract”, which it hopes will attract investment into the
upstream oil sector by simplifying the calculation of permitted recoverable costs (that have
Chapter 2 | Southeast Asia’s energy prospects to 2040

75

2

been a source of dispute in the past), and to better incentivise private sector participation
by allowing a greater share of gross oil production.
Malaysia’s proven oil reserves are similar in size to Indonesia’s, at 3.6 billion barrels, and
are located predominately in the waters off Peninsular Malaysia, as well as Sarawak and
Sabah. Malaysia is the second-largest oil producer in Southeast Asia, with output of
700 kb/d in 2016, down from its peak of 830 kb/d in 2003. Significant discoveries during the
period 2002-2005 have led to the development of a number of large projects. These
include the Gumusut-Kakap field, which began producing in late 2014 with an annual peak
production of around 148 kb/d (meaning it is responsible for around a one-fifth of
Malaysia’s total oil production), and the Malikai field, which also came into production in
2014 at a rate of 60 kb/d. These projects have allowed Malaysia recently to turn around its
trajectory of decline, with production showing three years of successive year-on-year
increases.
Malaysia’s oil sector faces two distinct challenges going forward. The first is that half of
Malaysia’s remaining recoverable oil resources are in fields smaller than 100 million barrels,
requiring an approach to planning for their production that is different from the model that
has served it well in the past. In recognition of this issue, the government introduced in
2013 a range of tax and duty waivers designed to attract investment in marginal fields. The
second challenge relates to stemming the decline in the large, mature fields that have been
the cornerstone of Malaysia’s production for decades. This includes the potential for use of
EOR to extend the life and increasing the recovery factor of the fields. Falling output at
Tapis and nearby fields prompted ExxonMobil and Petronas to undertake a large-scale EOR
project there, while Petronas has worked with several partners on EOR development for
fields in the Baram Delta and North Sabah. Further EOR potential is relatively low, given
that only a small number of reservoirs in Malaysia are suitable for such techniques
however, in certain areas, including the K5 field, high CO2 content offers the potential for
miscible flooding using CO2.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Tackling both challenges is complicated in the short to medium term by the low oil price
environment. This has already impeded efforts to stimulate exploration and production by
awarding “risk service contracts”, such as those for the Berantai and Balai fields offered in
2011, which were designed to incentivise investment by providing a performance-based fee
and favourable fiscal terms to develop and operate marginal fields. Both these contracts
were terminated in 2016 due to the more challenging price environment.
Malaysia’s oil supply is projected to remain broadly level to the mid-2020s before slowly
falling to around 490 kb/d in 2040. The recent success of the ramp up of oil production
from deepwater projects in offshore Sabah and the start of EOR projects have had some
success in reversing declines recently, but will not be enough to stem declining oil output in
the longer term.
Thailand has proven reserves of around 400 million barrels, concentrated mostly in the Gulf
of Thailand, and produces around 460 kb/d, of which around 60% was NGLs. Onshore
76

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

production is marginal and comes notably from the mature Sikrit field. Production has
grown almost two-and-a-half-fold since 2000, but new prospects are limited, and Thailand’s
oil production has likely already reached its high water mark. It is projected to fall slowly to
2020, reaching 435 kb/d, but then more rapidly as Thailand’s limited resource base is
depleted.
Viet Nam has significant proven reserves of 4.4 billion barrels, larger than those of
Indonesia and Malaysia. However, production of around 310 kb/d is not commensurate
with the size of the resource base, despite concerted efforts to bring new fields into
production. This is because the largest producing fields, namely Bach Ho, Rong and Rong
SE, are all in decline. Relatively energetic efforts to develop new fields have been hindered
in recent years by the low oil price environment: while nine areas were explored in 2013
and 2014, this number dropped to just three in 2015. The most promising areas for
exploration are the Cuu Long, Nam Con Son and Malay basins, located offshore southern
Viet Nam. Several new projects that have come on stream have allowed overall production
to remain relatively stable for over a decade, but these will likely be unable to stave off
falling oil production over the long term. Viet Nam’s oil output is projected to decrease to
around 270 kb/d in 2020 and remain at around this level to 2040.

Demand, refining and trade
Oil demand in Southeast Asia is expected to grow robustly over the period to 2040,
propelled by an increase in demand for mobility. The addition of 26 million cars and
1.6 million trucks to the vehicle stock means that transport alone accounts for over 60% of
the increase in oil demand over this period, which rises from 4.7 mb/d in 2016 to nearly
6.6 mb/d. Much of the rest of the increase is attributed to rising demand for petrochemical
feedstocks. Meeting this additional demand has implications not just on the level of import
of crude, but also on refining.
In 2000, Southeast Asia had sufficient refining capacity to serve oil product demand in the
region. However, modest capacity additions over the last 15 years have not kept pace with
the rapid growth in demand, which has changed the picture significantly. In 2016, oil
product demand (including bunkers) in Southeast Asia amounted to 6 mb/d while refining
capacity stood at 4.8 mb/d, making the region a large net product importer (Table 2.5).7
Although many projects have been proposed to address this deficit, only a handful have
reached final investment decision due to various bottlenecks.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

In the near term, two expansion projects are likely to proceed in Indonesia, a 100 kb/d
expansion of the Balikpapan refinery due to become operational by 2021, and Pertamina
and Saudi Aramco’s investment in the Cilacap refinery’s expansion and upgrade. A third
project, the Tuban refinery, is expected to become operational around 2023. Other
7

WEO methodology typically excludes bunkers from regional demand analysis, as they do not count as
domestic demand. However, Southeast Asia has a high share of bunkers in its total demand relative to other
regions due to its significant marine and air transportation hubs. Therefore, an estimate of future bunker
demand has been added to our demand projections.

Chapter 2 | Southeast Asia’s energy prospects to 2040

77

2

greenfield projects face difficulties in attracting investment, an issue that is exacerbated by
margins that are squeezed by regulated fuel prices (even though subsidies have been
removed). However, the strong demand outlook means that there is an expectation for
additional capacity to come online in the longer term, particularly if the investment climate
improves.
Table 2.5 ⊳

Oil demand by product in Southeast Asia in the
New Policies Scenario (mb/d)
2016

2025

2030

2040

LPG/ethane

0.69

0.85

0.93

Naphtha

0.49

0.65

Gasoline

1.31

Kerosene

0.50

Diesel
Fuel oil
Total oil demand**

2016-2040
Delta

CAAGR*

1.01

0.32

1.6%

0.67

0.72

0.23

1.6%

1.60

1.67

1.67

0.36

1.0%

0.74

0.92

1.33

0.83

4.2%

1.54

2.04

2.03

2.19

0.65

1.5%

1.04

0.88

1.08

1.18

0.14

0.5%

6.0

7.4

7.9

8.8

2.8

1.6%

* Compound average annual growth rate. ** Total includes international bunkers and other products such as
asphalt, waxes and lubricants. Note: Each product demand includes demand for bunker fuels (international
marine and aviation).

In February 2017, Saudi Aramco decided to invest $7 billion in Malaysia’s Refinery and
Petrochemical Integrated Development (RAPID) project, which it hopes will position the
country as a major product exporter in Southeast Asia. With a capacity of around 300 kb/d,
the project is expected to produce high-specification gasoline and other products from
around 2020. In Viet Nam, the 200 kb/d Nghi Son project is expected to come online during
2018, after a year of delays, while the expansion of the Dung Quat refinery is also in
progress. With surging domestic demand, several expansion projects are being considered
in Thailand, although most of these would take several years to materialise. Brunei
Darussalam may add a 160 kb/d of distillation capacity. Similarly, Cambodia is building its
first 40 kb/d refinery by establishing a joint venture between Cambodia Petrochemical
Company and China’s Sino Great Wall International Engineering Company.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Given the region’s robust demand outlook, we project more capacity comes online in the
longer term, increasing the region’s refining capacity to 7.7 mb/d, and throughput to
6.8 mb/d, by 2040. However, this level of capacity is still insufficient to meet growing
demand, implying the region remains a net product importer with an import requirement
of around 1.3 mb/d in 2040 (Table 2.6).
While Southeast Asia remains a net product importer, each oil product presents a different
pattern in terms of trade balance. LPG and kerosene, which show the fastest growth,
continue to be imported to meet rising demand. On the other hand, increasing refinery
runs almost fully eliminate the need for gasoline and diesel imports. However, as China
tries to export its surplus diesel to adjacent Asian markets, some diesel produced in the
region is likely to be forced to find an export market. With the growing trend towards using
78

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

low sulfur transportation fuel, our projection is that desulfurisation capacity outpaces that
of primary distillation capacity over the next decade in Southeast Asia. However, we cannot
rule out the possibility of refiners failing to make adequate investments (in upgrading,
hydro-treating or gasoline blenders) to comply with the tightening fuel specifications. This
would mean that even though there is demand exceeding refining capacity, a considerable
portion of this demand could be met by more sophisticated refineries in other regions,
which could lead to a wider product deficit. This scenario would increase the risk of some
older, less complex refineries suffering from reduced utilisation despite strong demand.
Table 2.6 ⊳

Southeast Asia refining capacity and refinery runs
in the New Policies Scenario (mb/d)

Southeast Asia
World

2016
Capacity

Net capacity
additions
to 2040

2016

2025

2040

2025

2040

4.8

2.9

4.2

5.4

6.8

0.1

-

97.7

13.7

79.8

85.0

88.5

10.6

14.0

Refinery runs

Capacity at risk*

*Defined as the difference between refinery capacity, on one hand, and refinery runs, on the other, with the
latter including a 14% allowance for downtime. This is always smaller than the spare capacity, which is the
difference between total capacity and refinery runs.

Overall, total product imports stay relatively stable, at today’s level of 1.3 mb/d, as
increases in demand are met by a commensurate increase in refinery capacity (Figure 2.12).
However, the declining share of Indonesia in total imports from around a half today to less
than 20% by 2040 reflects the growing import requirements of other Southeast Asian
countries such as Thailand and the Philippines, which expand by almost 60%.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

While Southeast Asia’s product import needs remain steady over time in our projections, its
crude import needs increase. Net crude import requirements grow substantially, from
2.1 mb/d today to 5.5 mb/d by 2040. The recent plunge in oil prices and the increased
competition for Asian market share in crude markets (allowing buyers to press for
discounted prices) somewhat alleviated the pressures of the import bill. However, the
eventual rebalancing of oil markets, higher prices and the region’s ever-increasing import
needs imply that these dynamics are unlikely to play out over the longer term. A number of
risks exist, not least the reliance on a small number of Middle East suppliers, while pressure
on the Strait of Malacca intensifies due to the lack of viable alternatives.
With this in mind, some countries are adding storage capacity, which could help them
respond to short-term disruptions, although these projects have been driven more by
commercial motivations. Three of the top-ten largest tank farms under construction in the
world are in Malaysia and several more projects are currently being planned in Indonesia,
Singapore and Viet Nam (IEA, 2017c). A number of Middle Eastern national oil companies
are eyeing investment opportunities in refineries in the region, which could help ensure a
stable supply of crude oil to some extent. Nonetheless, all these are insufficient to allay
fully energy security concerns.
Chapter 2 | Southeast Asia’s energy prospects to 2040

79

2

Figure 2.12 ⊳ Oil product trade balance in Southeast Asia in the

kb/d

New Policies Scenario
400

2016
2040

0
- 400
- 800
-1 200
-1 600

LPG

Naphtha Gasoline Kerosene

Diesel

Fuel oil

Total*

Despite an envisaged increase in refinery capacity,
Southeast Asia remains a net importer of oil products
*Includes other oil products.

A low-carbon transition would point towards a different trajectory for Southeast Asia,
including by reducing oil demand. In the Sustainable Development Scenario, stricter fueleconomy standards and the greater use of electric and natural gas vehicles, keeps oil use in
transport virtually flat to 2040 (despite car ownership rising by almost half over the period).
The reduced overall demand for oil has implications on the region’s crude import
requirement, which is reduced by 1.9 mb/d, to 3.6 mb/d by 2040. Temporary relief
provided by the period of low oil prices has been capitalised on in a number of countries,
who have used the opportunity to reform existing fossil-fuel subsidies (see Chapter 1).

2.3.2

Coal

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Resources and production
Coal production in Southeast Asia falls from 400 million tonnes of coal equivalent (Mtce) in
2016 to around 375 Mtce in 2040. This is accounted for entirely by changes in Indonesia,
where the government has announced plans to cap coal production at 400 million tonnes
(around 300 Mtce) from 2019 onwards. This policy shift serves as general guidance for our
long-term production outlook but, in light of the fragmented Indonesian coal industry,
which involves many small mines that are difficult to control, and the importance of coal
mining for employment and fiscal revenues, we do not expect the target to be met strictly.
Indonesian coal production drops to 340 Mtce in 2025 and reaches around 315 Mtce in
2040. The increase in regional demand means that net exports of the ASEAN group of
countries dwindle over the Outlook period, and by 2040, the region is a net importer of
80

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

coal. 8 This contrasts starkly with the trend over the last 25 years that saw a very steep rise
in net exports from the region. This shift towards regional consumption reflects both the
natural increase in energy demand, but also targeted government policy: in its 2015-2019
medium-term development plan, the government of Indonesia included a domestic market
obligation set at around one-third of its output.
Indonesian coal exports fall from just over 290 Mtce in 2016 to around 170 Mtce in 2040.
Despite the drop in exports over the Outlook period, shipments to the international market
remain important for Indonesian coal producers as they support local employment and
bring (tax) revenues. Indonesia is expected to remain a swing supplier in the coal market
(i.e. the country can quickly adjust its production to react to changes in international coal
prices). India remains the primary market for Indonesian coal (geographic proximity and
the low ash and sulfur content of Indonesian coal clearly plays in its favour) but Indonesia’s
share in the Indian market declines as the country reduces its exposure to the international
market. Various countries within the ASEAN group see their coal demand increasing
strongly over the coming 25 years and Indonesia, due to its geography, will serve much of
these growing import needs. With Indonesian exports declining, other coal exporters are
ready to step in and fill the gap. Australia for instance increases its exports of coal by more
than 15% in the coming 25 years, and Russia and South Africa are also well placed to
capture market share from Indonesia.
Viet Nam sees its coal production rise modestly over the period but even a small increase in
output hinges on the introduction of competition in the coal market, successful
implementation of coal price reforms and productivity improvements. Viet Nam has just
overtaken Thailand as the second-largest coal consumer in the region and, with demand
expected to soar, is projected to become the region’s largest importer over the Outlook
period.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Demand
Southeast Asia is, after India, the primary growth centre of coal demand in the world. Its
coal consumption more than doubles to 390 Mtce in 2040. Coal demand growth in
Southeast Asia is fundamentally a power generation story: consumption in power plants
accounts for three-quarters of the additional coal use in the coming 25 years (Figure 2.13).
Electricity demand grows by 3.7% per year to 2040 and the region’s power system planners
need to mobilise all sources of power generation to keep pace. Coal maintains a strong
foothold in the region’s projected consumption not only because it is markedly cheaper
than natural gas, but also because coal projects are in many cases easier to pursue as they
do not require the capital-intensive infrastructure associated with gas. On the other hand,
coal projects face considerable public opposition that have delayed development efforts,
for example, the Krabi plant in Thailand, the Inn Din plant in Myanmar and the Atimonan
plant in the Philippines. The coal share in the region’s power mix increases from around 35%
today to a little over 40% in 2040 while that of gas drops from nearly 45% to less than 30%.
8

Intra-regional trade (from Indonesia to the rest of Southeast Asia) is not captured in the overall export
number for the region, which only accounts for inter-regional exchanges.

Chapter 2 | Southeast Asia’s energy prospects to 2040

81

2

Figure 2.13 ⊳ Coal demand growth in Southeast Asia by sector in the

Mtce

New Policies Scenario
400

Industry*
Power

300

200

100

2016

2040

Power generation accounts for 75% of coal demand growth in Southeast Asia to 2040
* Industry includes energy consumption in blast furnaces.

Some 100 GW of new coal-fired capacity is built in Southeast Asia over the Outlook period,
bringing installed coal capacity to 160 GW in 2040 (40% of which is in Indonesia alone).
Although around 25% of the new plants added to 2040 use subcritical technology, the bulk
of the capacity additions rely on more efficient supercritical and ultra-supercritical
technology. By 2040, around half of the coal fleet uses either supercritical or ultrasupercritical technology, helping to bring the fleet’s average efficiency up from 33% today
to 38% in 2040 (Figure 2.14).

© OECD/IEA, 2017

The strong increase in coal-fired power generation bears the risk of a significant increase in
CO2 and air pollutant emissions such as sulfur dioxide (SO2) nitrous oxides (NOX) and fine
particulate matter (PM2.5) over the Outlook period if not controlled by adequate regulation
(see Chapter 3). The technology to mitigate air pollutant emissions from large coal
combustion plants is readily available but use of this technology must be incentivised by
regulation. Moreover, in terms of tackling SO2 emissions, the region benefits from the
prevalence of Indonesian coal which generally has low sulfur content. Therefore, in
Southeast Asia, disconnecting air pollutant emissions growth from coal demand growth is
primarily a policy challenge. All major coal-consuming countries in the region have
emissions regulation standards for coal-fired plant in place but these vary in stringency. In
light of the large amount of yet to be built coal capacity over the coming 25 years it is
therefore crucial that policy-makers in Southeast Asia continue to raise the stringency of
emission standards for new plants.
The use of coal in the Sustainable Development Scenario is vastly diminished, falling by
around 30% in the period to 2040, as renewables eat into coal’s share of the power mix. As
a result, by 2040, 70% less coal is used in the Sustainable Development Scenario than in the
New Policies Scenario.
82

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

Figure 2.14 ⊳ Installed coal-fired capacity by technology and average fleet
efficiency in Southeast Asia in the New Policies Scenario
160

40%

GW

Advanced
120

38%

2

Supercritical
Subcritical

80

36%

40

34%

2016

2025

2030

2035

2040

Fleet efficiency
(right axis)

32%

Coal-fired capacity more than doubles by 2040, but the addition of supercritical and
advanced technologies leads to a significant increase in the fleet efficiency

2.3.3

Natural gas

Resources and production

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Natural gas production in Southeast Asia fluctuates slightly over the Outlook period, but
returns to its current level of around 220 billion cubic metres (bcm) by 2040 in the New
Policies Scenario.
Indonesia remains the largest producer in the region with output growing from 77 bcm in
2016 to 90 bcm by 2040 – a downward revision of 45 bcm in 2040 compared with the
previous Southeast Asia Energy Outlook (IEA, 2015). Currently some 40% of Indonesia’s
production is geared towards exports, but the increase in supply over the period is not
sufficient to offset domestic demand increases, and the country becomes a net importer of
natural gas in the mid-2030s. With resources of almost 15 trillion cubic metres, a third of
which are unconventional gas resources (mostly coalbed methane and shale gas), the
country is not short of gas but developing large new projects such as East Natuna (Asia’s
largest untapped gas field, located in the Natuna Sea off the coast of Western Kalimantan)
becomes increasingly challenging. The project is expensive and technically difficult to
realise, due to the high CO2 content of the gas, and the case for developing the field also is
complicated by the ample availability of LNG on the international market. With these
factors in mind, output from East Natuna is not included in this year’s supply projections –
although the continued desire of the Indonesian authorities to encourage field
development keeps this possibility open. Key contributions to Indonesia’s output growth
come from the “Indonesia Deepwater Development” project (located off the coast of
Eastern Kalimantan) and tapping of the country’s significant coalbed methane resources,
mostly located in Eastern Kalimantan and Sumatra (Figure 2.15).
Chapter 2 | Southeast Asia’s energy prospects to 2040

83

Figure 2.15 ⊳ Key natural gas resources and infrastructure in Southeast Asia

A large increase in gas infrastructure is expected to increase flexibility
in Southeast Asian natural gas markets

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Domestic market obligations and gas tariffs that are lower than the fuel’s export value
hamper the attractiveness of upstream investments in Indonesia. Preferential prices and
priority access granted to some industries, for example, fertiliser production, have led to a
rapid increase in demand, wasteful consumption and temporary gas shortages. Reform of
the current regulatory framework, which is perceived as being complicated and unclear, is
not only crucial for conventional gas development but also a prerequisite for the
development of unconventional gas, notably for coalbed methane to resolve issues of
overlap with coal exploitation rights. Our Outlook assumes an improvement of regulatory
conditions for unconventional gas production over time, helping to propel output to
16 bcm in 2040 (around 17% of the country’s gas production by then).
Malaysia’s challenge is to offset declining output from its mature fields over the projection
period. The government has taken measures to stimulate new upstream investment such
as a reduction of the petroleum tax and other fiscal incentives. The first ever shipment of
gas from a floating LNG plant was in 2017, from the Petronas’ Kanowit project, which could
pave the way for monetisation of other stranded gas fields in Malaysia. Malaysian gas
production likely reached its high water mark at 70 bcm in 2016, and is expected to go into
84

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

long-term decline. By 2040, Malaysian gas production drops to around 55 bcm, some 20%
below 2016 levels. As a result, Malaysian LNG imports grow markedly over the next
25 years to meet domestic demand.
Box 2.2 ⊳ Unlocking Indonesia’s resources through carbon capture and storage
CO2 capture and storage (CCS) has been most successfully deployed where CO2 capture
has a manageable impact on the economics of projects, or where the captured CO2 has
a commercial value. Most projects to date have involved either or both CO2 separated
from natural gas during processing and use of the CO2 for enhanced oil recovery. These
two factors coincide in certain parts of Indonesia where CCS could enable increased oil
and gas production while reducing the associated emissions.
CCS, coupled with the potential for CO2 flood enhanced oil recovery in some Indonesian
fields, could enable production from some of Indonesia’s high CO2 content natural gas
fields. Indonesia’s vast natural gas reserves are some of the most CO2 rich in the world.
The high concentrations of CO2 have contributed to a number of large fields remaining
undeveloped.
The East Natuna block in the Natuna field is potentially one of the largest fields in
Southeast Asia, with 6.3 tcm of resources, yet remains undeveloped due in part to a CO2
concentration of over 70%. The high CO2 concentrations present a challenge to the
economics of production as well as a technical challenge given the vast quantities of
CO2, which need to be captured, separated and reinjected into the field.
There are a number of fields in the vicinity of South Sumatra that could be candidates
for tertiary recovery through CO2 EOR. The potential for CO2 EOR in the region is
somewhat limited by the geography – low reservoir pressures in candidate fields mean
the CO2 would not mix with the oil making recovery less efficient. However, there is
increasing interest in CO2 EOR in Indonesia as, despite its relative inefficiency, it still
provides a potential solution for increasing the recoverable proportion of original oil in
place.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

CCS has been employed in CO2 rich fields elsewhere in the world. The Gorgon field in
north-western Australia has a CO2 concentration of around 14%, so CO2 capture and
storage were requirements for permitting the project. First gas was shipped from the
field in March 2016 and CO2 injection into a formation below the processing plant is
expected to commence in late 2017.
Growth prospects for production in Myanmar are positive but significant challenges
remain. Much of the country’s offshore acreage remains unexplored, infrastructure is
ageing and, with the exception of the pipeline link to China, needs upgrading and expansion
to handle larger production volumes. Despite regulatory issues, foreign companies have
shown interest in Myanmar’s gas fields with Woodside Petroleum Ltd. having recently
discovered a few offshore fields. The combination of promising reserves and increased
Chapter 2 | Southeast Asia’s energy prospects to 2040

85

2

investment allows Myanmar to increase gas production to around 25 bcm by 2040.
Thailand’s production faces long-term decline. New discoveries have been few and small in
recent years, insufficient to counter the rapid drop in production from Thailand’s mature
resource base. Moreover, delays in passing the new petroleum legislation have held back
investment. We project Thailand’s gas production to drop to some 18 bcm in 2040, around
60% of today’s levels. The country thus is expected to become a significant importer of LNG
to bridge the supply-demand gap.

Demand
Natural gas demand in Southeast Asia increases at a rate of 2% per year over the period to
2040, a marked slowdown from the more than 6% per year over the past 25 years.
Nevertheless, gas demand continues to grow faster than production in the region, a trend
that began a few years ago, and with this, net exports are gradually diminishing. By the
mid-2020s the region as a whole turns into a net importer of gas (Figure 2.16). This has
important implications for infrastructure development in the region over the next 25 years.
Regasification terminals – onshore or floating – are growing rapidly in the region with four
facilities currently under construction and some 20 terminals at various stages of planning.
Various bilateral pipelines are in operation today, but an important task is integrating them
into a harmonised regional pipeline network. The Trans-ASEAN Gas Pipeline project
attempts to achieve this and could help bring important energy security benefits for the
region and increase liquidity of gas trade. Yet, various commercial, technical and regulatory
challenges remain, not least concerning the development of Indonesia’s East Natuna
project, which would be an important source of new supply. Yet even without East Natuna,
an integrated Southeast Asian pipeline network would bring flexibility and diversification of
supply sources (see Chapter 3).

© OECD/IEA, 2017

While gas demand in the power sector and in industry grew at similar rates in the past, this
trend is set to change in the coming years. Gas burn in the power sector grows at 1.4% per
year while industrial gas use grows at around 4% per year. Further demand growth is
constrained in the power sector primarily because of the relatively high cost of gas
compared with coal. Industry (especially the light industry branches) is thus the main
growth engine in the region, accounting for 60% of the incremental gas demand in the
period to 2040.
Based on our outlook for Asian gas and coal prices, it is markedly more expensive to build
and run a gas-fired plant to generate baseload power than a coal plant. Thus, gas plants are
largely confined to run in load-following operation (mid-merit) and to meet peak load in
the region’s power systems. Various countries in Southeast Asia make progress in phasing
out fossil-fuel subsidies over the Outlook period. While this is a welcome development, it
also implies that in the absence of supportive policies like carbon pricing, the commercial
case for gas weakens in power generation (several countries, including Indonesia, Viet Nam
and Malaysia currently regulate the price of gas consumed in power generation). As a
result, the share of natural gas in Southeast Asia’s power mix drops from nearly 45% today
to just under 30% in 2040.
86

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

Figure 2.16 ⊳ Natural gas balance in Southeast Asia

bcm

in the New Policies Scenario
300

Demand

250

Production

200
150
100
50
0
- 50
- 100
2000

Net trade
2010

2020

2030

2040

Strong demand growth and only modest increases in production mean that
Southeast Asia becomes a net gas importer in the mid-2020s

Transmission and distribution networks, and depending on the country, LNG import
terminals, are capital intensive but a prerequisite for gas demand growth. The dilemma is
that gas demand cannot grow without infrastructure but infrastructure development is
only attractive for investors if there are good prospects for demand growth, a consideration
of particular importance for Myanmar, Viet Nam and the Philippines. Large metropolitan
areas with industrial zones are ideal to establish anchor consumers and develop a regional
gas infrastructure; once a critical mass of demand is reached, the network can be further
expanded to other parts of the country. Coastal areas are often particularly well suited as
they allow for LNG imports, possibly starting with floating storage and regasification units
technology that can gradually be scaled up allowing the infrastructure to grow
commensurate with demand.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Southeast Asia has sizeable regasification terminal project plans, and makes progress on
cross-border pipeline development over the Outlook period. However, infrastructure is
costly and investments in the various gas supply chain components are pursued by
different stakeholders, making co-ordination a critical element of successful project
development. In our Outlook, difficulties to finance and build new infrastructure, alongside
the commercial challenges to compete against coal and renewables, are potential
constraints on gas market development. In the long term, gas loses out against coal in the
region, the share of gas stays flat at around a fifth of primary energy demand in the period
to 2040 while that of coal increases from 17% today to 26%.
Indonesia, by some distance the largest gas market in the region, sees its demand increase
from 44 bcm in 2016 to nearly 100 bcm in 2040, with industry accounting for more than
Chapter 2 | Southeast Asia’s energy prospects to 2040

87

2

60% of the growth (Figure 2.17). The non energy-intensive industries are the primary
engine of growth (expansion of gas distribution networks for small and medium enterprises
is critical), followed by the chemical and petrochemical industry which relies on gas as a
feedstock, for instance, for fertiliser production. There is significant downside risk to gas
demand growth in the Indonesian industry: if gas remains unavailable, coal would be ready
to step in, with negative environmental impacts.

bcm

Figure 2.17 ⊳ Natural gas balance in Indonesia in the New Policies Scenario
100

Net trade

80

Other

60

Industry

40

Power

20
0
- 20

2016

2025

2030

2035

2040

Rising domestic consumption more than offsets the growth in production,
and Indonesia becomes a net importer of natural gas by 2035

Natural gas plays a slightly expanded role in the Sustainable Development Scenario,
accounting for 22% of primary energy demand in 2040 (compared to 21% in the New
Policies Scenario). It is the only fossil fuel whose use increases in power generation, while
its use in transport increases almost four-fold in the period to 2040. Consumption in
industry, the largest end-user of gas, grows less strongly than in the New Policies Scenario
however, as electrification eats into the share of all fossil fuels.

2.3.4

Renewables

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Bioenergy
Bioenergy currently accounts for around 25% of total final consumption, and despite some
substitution with other fuels, is expected to retain a prominent share in the energy balance
to 2040, by which time it accounts for 13% of final consumption. This general decrease
belies several divergent dynamics between not only the end-use sectors, but also the types
of bioenergy being consumed. Bioenergy use in buildings, which currently accounts for
almost 80% of the total (as a result of firewood burned by around 250 million people
currently without access to clean cooking facilities), falls by a third, despite a 30% increase
88

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

in energy demand overall. It is displaced, to a degree, by LPG — of the 74 million people
who gain access to clean cooking over the period, 50 million do so through access to LPG
cookstoves.
Bioenergy use in transport more than doubles in the period to 2040, as a result of
increasing biofuel use in cars and trucks, supported by mandates already imposed in
several countries. The push towards biofuels helps fulfil three imperatives: it supports
important local palm crop industries, particularly in Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand; it
reduces dependency on imported petroleum products; it helps climate considerations,
provided the palms from which the oil harvested are grown sustainably.
Industrial agriculture, particularly of sugar and palm oil, are conducive to producing power
from biomass. Southeast Asia’s current biomass generation capacity of around 7.4 GW is
expected to increase to almost 19 GW by 2040. While this is useful as an auto-generation
scheme for businesses, it also helps to utilise palm oil mill effluent, which would otherwise
produce a large amount of methane gas.
In the Sustainable Development Scenario, bioenergy use undergoes two fundamental
changes. In the residential sector, its consumption falls by more than 90%, as use of solid
biomass is eliminated in all but the most marginal communities. In the transport sector, its
use increases more than four-fold, as biofuels are increasingly used.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Solar
Solar resources across the region range from around 1 400 kWh per square metre per year
(kWh/m2/year), to 1 900/kWh/m2/year. In the New Policies Scenario, solar PV is the
second-fastest growing technology in terms of installed generation capacity, increasing at
around 11% per year (albeit from a low base). From 4.2 GW in 2016, solar PV capacity
expands to more than 52 GW. Thailand currently accounts for most of the region’s installed
capacity, and incentivises investment through a feed-in tariff (FiT) introduced in 2011. This
is expected to increase in the coming years, with Thailand announcing a target of 30% for
renewables in the energy mix by 2036 in its Alternative Energy Development Plan 20152036. Thailand also envisages robust growth in roof-top solar installations, targeting around
10 GW. Indonesia, which accounts for just under one-third of Southeast Asia’s solar PV
capacity in 2040, also has ambitious plans, and in 2017 replaced its FiT incentives
(introduced in 2013) with a new tariff system that is based on a reference to the cost of
electricity production in a given region. Its aim is to encourage the deployment of
renewables-based power outside of Java-Bali, in areas where the cost of production is
relatively higher, due to the prevalence of oil-based generation. Indonesia hopes to reach
5 GW of renewables-based capacity by 2020. Viet Nam’s recently revised National Power
Development Plan aims for 850 MW of capacity in 2020, rising to 12 GW by 2030. In mid2017, Viet Nam introduced a FiT for utility-scale projects. The country has seen a recent
uptick in activity, and so far in 2017, EVN, the state-owned utility, has announced plans for
350 MW of solar PV capacity due to come online in 2021, and Tata Solar announced a
100 MW plant at Binh Phuoc. Viet Nam also has plans to support distributed solar power,
Chapter 2 | Southeast Asia’s energy prospects to 2040

89

2

and alongside the European Union’s Energy Initiative Partnership Dialogue Facility, is
designing a net metering scheme to help stimulate investment. Malaysia hopes to reach
1 GW of capacity by 2020, but starts from less than 270 MW today.
One potential enabler of more rapid solar PV uptake is the close links many economies in
Southeast Asia have with China, by far the world’s largest (and lowest cost) producer of
photovoltaic cells, as well as to the Malaysian market, the world’s third-largest producer.
Existing free trade agreements allow tariff-free access for Chinese manufacturers. Large
producers of PV cells, including Yingli Solar (the world’s second-largest producer) and Trina
Solar, have announced investments for factories to manufacture cells in Thailand for both
domestic and export markets.
Falling costs worldwide, local air pollution concerns and the imperative of electricity access
particularly in Indonesia and the Philippines means that the role of solar power could be far
greater than that projected in the New Policies Scenario. In the Sustainable
Development Scenario, where full access is assumed, solar PV capacity is three-times
larger, reaching 160 GW in 2040.

Wind
Wind energy resources vary across the region, with the greatest potential thought to be in
the Philippines, which has estimated technical potential of around 70 GW. Reflecting this,
the government of the Philippines has set wind power targets in its National Renewable
Energy Program, aiming to reach 2.3 GW of capacity by 2030. Progress since the plan was
announced in 2011 would suggest that this target is modest. Since 2013, wind power
capacity has increased from 33 MW to over 425 MW, with service contracts for projects
potentially adding a further 1.2 GW of capacity registered with the Department of Energy.
A key factor in the upswing in wind power activity in the Philippines has been the
introduction of FiTs in 2013, which ensured priority grid connection and power purchases.
Viet Nam’s wind resources, particularly along its 3 000 km of coastline, are also notable.
Technical potential is estimated at around 27 GW, only a small fraction of which has been
developed so far.
In the New Policies Scenario, wind power capacity increases from around 1 GW in 2016 to
around 22 GW in 2040, making it the fastest growing of all power technologies. However,
even with this increase, by 2040 it still only accounts for 4% of capacity and 2% of power
generation. In the Sustainable Development Scenario, wind power plays a far more
important role, its capacity reaching almost 100 GW by 2040.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Hydropower
Hydropower is by far the largest source of renewables-based power in Southeast Asia,
accounting for more than 70% of renewables-based capacity and 17% of total generation
capacity. There is a great deal of variation across countries, however, with hydropower
accounting for more than 40% of total generation in Cambodia and nearly 100% in Lao PDR
(its first thermal power plant at Hongsa began operation in 2015). Significant hydro
90

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

resources are untapped, with only around one-quarter of the Lower Mekong River Basin’s
estimated hydropower potential of 30 GW developed.
Lao PDR is showing the most ambition towards the development of hydro resources among
the countries in the Lower Mekong area, with plans to develop 24 GW of capacity and to
make electricity exports its main source of revenue by 2025. Already, Lao PDR is a major
exporter of electricity to Thailand, whose companies are involved in existing projects,
including the Xayaburi dam (1.3 GW capacity), which is expected to be completed in 2017.
In the New Policies Scenario, hydropower capacity more than doubles, reaching 105 GW in
2040, as development of resources in the Lower Mekong Region is accelerated in a push to
both meet domestic demand, but also for export, with electricity seen as a potentially
important source of revenue. Hydropower is more widely deployed in the Sustainable
Development Scenario, with capacity reaching around 130 GW by 2040.

Geothermal
Today Southeast Asia is home to one-quarter of the world’s geothermal generation
capacity, with the Philippines (1.9 GW) and Indonesia (1.5 GW) ranked as the second- and
third-largest producers. The high capacity factors (averaging above 70%, compared to 1520% for solar PV and 25-30% for wind) and the ability of geothermal plants to provide lowcarbon baseload electricity make them a potentially important source of sustainable energy
in areas where geothermal resources are located.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

The potential for geothermal for electricity generation is significant, estimated at around
4 GW in the Philippines and a further 29 GW in Indonesia. Indonesia has aggressively
pursued policies to promote investment in geothermal. In 2003, it passed a “Geothermal
Law” allowing operators to retain control of assets and mandating that all future fields be
transparently and competitively tendered for development. This law was supplanted in
2014 by one that removed the “mining” designation from geothermal development,
intending to help boost exploration by removing restrictions imposed on general mining
within protected areas and forests. In 2004, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources
developed a “Blueprint for Geothermal Development” that outlined plans for 6 GW of
capacity by 2020 and the General Plan of Energy set a target of 13.5 GW by 2040. In 2012,
the ministry introduced a FiT, while the Ministry of Finance capitalised a $200 million fund
intended to reduce the risk to investors seeking to develop geothermal resources. The
Philippines, whose remaining resources are more modest, has plans to develop 1.2 GW of
capacity by 2030, with the bulk happening before 2020.
In the New Policies Scenario, geothermal capacity increases more than three-fold, reaching
around 11 GW in 2040, predominantly through developments in Indonesia and the
Philippines. Further growth is constrained by the relatively high cost of geothermal
development, the risks associated with resource exploration, as well as by competition with
solar PV and coal to extend electricity access in both countries, where access remains a
significant issue. In the Sustainable Development Scenario, geothermal generation capacity
increases more rapidly, reaching 27 GW by 2040.
Chapter 2 | Southeast Asia’s energy prospects to 2040

91

2

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Chapter 3
Addressing Southeast Asia’s energy priorities
How does the region square a circle?
H i g h l i g ht s

 Energy policy-makers face multiple challenges across Southeast Asia, not least the
constant pressures on the energy system from robust economic and demographic
growth. Extending access to electricity to the 65 million people currently without it
remains a major priority, while ensuring affordable and secure energy and mitigating
environmental impacts.

 All countries in Southeast Asia achieve universal electricity access by the early 2030s
in the New Policies Scenario, a major achievement. This is achieved by deploying a
range of technologies and approaches, with around 40% connected by extending the
grid, one-third via mini-grids and the remainder via off-grid solutions. All fuels play a
part, but renewables are particularly important in providing access in remote areas,
providing a viable alternative to expensive diesel generators. The least-cost choice
for access depends on a range of factors, including available resources, population
density and the location of the existing grid.

 While policy efforts in many areas bear fruit, the New Policies Scenario also
highlights some troubling trends for energy security and emissions. Increasing
reliance on imported energy produces an import bill of more than $300 billion by
2040, mostly for oil. The demand patterns in this scenario also result in a 75%
increase in energy-related CO2 emissions, and continued public health impacts from
poor air quality.

 Meeting Southeast Asia’s energy imperatives will require a major commitment of
investment. In the New Policies Scenario, cumulative investment in energy supply
infrastructure and energy efficiency is $2.7 trillion in the period to 2040. Around half
of the investment on the supply side is for power generation and networks.

 The interconnection of energy networks and markets across Southeast Asia provides
a key route towards a more resilient and secure energy system. Harmonising
disparate regimes and intensifying efforts to increase energy interconnections could
lead to more efficient and secure use of energy across the region.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

 Putting the region’s energy system on a more sustainable path, as presented in a
Sustainable Development Scenario, would require a slight increase in energy supply
and efficiency investment to $2.9 trillion and a major shift in capital flows from oil,
gas and coal production towards efficiency and the power sector. This path would
reduce CO2 emissions by around 50% compared with our main scenario, improve air
quality and deliver a range of energy security and economic benefits. The increasing
penetration of renewables, coupled with the more efficient use of energy overall,
reduces dependence on imported oil and gas, leading to an import bill that is around
$175 billion less than the New Policies Scenario in 2040.
Chapter 3 | Addressing Southeast Asia’s energy priorities

93

3.1

Electricity access: the case of small islands and rural
communities

The issue of electricity access in Southeast Asia has two main dimensions: the first is that
65 million people remain without access at all and the second is that millions more have
access to sub-par connections, relying on costly and polluting diesel generators to provide
power. Of those currently without access, more than 95% live in four countries: Indonesia
(23 million), Philippines (11 million), Myanmar (22 million) and Cambodia (6 million).
The issue of electricity access has long been at the forefront of policy decisions across the
region. A number of countries have made tangible gains through concerted governmentbacked plans to extend access. Between 2000 and 2016, more than 170 million people
gained access to electricity in Southeast Asia, bringing the total electrification rate up by
almost 30 percentage points, from 62% in 2000 to 90% in 2016 (Figure 3.1).
Figure 3.1 ⊳

Electricity access rates across Southeast Asia in the
New Policies Scenario

100%
80%
60%

Philippines
Thailand
Viet Nam
Indonesia

40%
20%

Lao PDR
Cambodia
Myanmar
2000

2016

2020

2030

2040

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Universal access is attained in all Southeast Asian countries by early-2030s

Southeast Asia succeeds in achieving universal electricity access by the early-2030s in each
of our scenarios. The region does this by deploying a variety of tools, with mini-grid and offgrid technologies accounting for more than half of additional access-related demand
(Figure 3.2). Grid connections, however, are expected to remain crucial to meeting access
objectives across Southeast Asia, not just in countries where current low access rates
reflect underdevelopment, but also in Indonesia and the Philippines, where some islands
are large enough and have sufficient population density to justify grid extensions. In
reaching universal access, an additional 145 million people have access to electricity in
2030.1
1

This number includes all people who gain access, accounting for those to whom access is extended, as well
as natural population growth.

94

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

Figure 3.2 ⊳

Additional access-driven demand and its share of total
incremental demand by technology in 2030

TWh

Additonal demand for access

Total additional demand

20
15

Additional demand from
current consumers

3

10
5

Grid

Mini-grid

Off-grid

Grid extensions account for less than half the increase in access-related energy demand

In this section, we evaluate the various choices available to policy-makers in the four
countries with the largest access issues: Indonesia, Philippines, Myanmar and Cambodia,
and present the likely routes towards access taken by each given their unique
circumstances. We do this by examining a range of factors, including relative costs of
various technologies, resource availability, topography and population density to present a
least-cost path towards electrification.
We pay particular attention to the cases of Papua and East Java in Indonesia, as each has an
acute electricity access problem but under a very different set of circumstances. Papua is a
sparsely populated, large and remote island, while East Java relatively is densely populated
and close to more developed West Java and Bali. The different conditions present a useful
proxy for other areas across the region, where access is related in some circumstances,
such as Myanmar and Cambodia, to broader under development, and in others, notably the
Philippines, to geographic isolation. We assess the government of Indonesia’s plans to
promote electricity access in both regions, to explore the lessons they hold for other
countries in Southeast Asia.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

3.1.1

Indonesia

Ambitious government plans to extend electricity access have yielded fruit in Indonesia,
where the number of people without access declined from around 100 million in 2000 to
around 23 million in 2016 even with a population increase of almost one-quarter.
Therefore, Indonesia alone was responsible for 55% of the net decrease in the number of
people without access across Southeast Asia since 2000.
Those remaining without access in Indonesia are concentrated in a number of provinces,
including East and Central Java, East Nusa Tenggara and Papua, where 2 110 of the
Chapter 3 | Addressing Southeast Asia’s energy priorities

95

2 424 villages across the country that remain without any access are located. The
circumstances in each differ significantly: East Java (where almost 4 million people do not
have access to electricity) has more than 80-times as many people per square
kilometre (km) as Papua (where 1.6 million people do not have access), and is relatively
close to the most densely populated and developed urban centres in the country. This
underscores that there is no uniform solution to meeting Indonesia’s energy access targets,
and that a great deal of pragmatism and flexibility will be needed to meet its goal of
universal access by 2024. In recognition, the plans introduced by the government of
Indonesia are multi-dimensional; they include the extension of the existing grid, promoting
micro-hydro and off-grid solar technologies as well as solar-diesel hybrid and isolated diesel
generators. While the plans rely heavily on financing from the national utility, Perusahaan
Listrik Negara (PLN), this is largely enabled by the presence of private participation in
commercially viable projects in the country’s broad power sector, which gives some
latitude to PLN to support projects that the government deems as having social benefits,
rather than immediate commercial returns (Box 3.2).
Figure 3.3 ⊳

Papua’s village electrification plan

The location and population density of villages in Papua that have no access
make them prime candidates for off-grid electrification

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Source: Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources, Indonesia; IEA analysis.

At around 48%, the electrification rate in Papua is the lowest of any region in the country,
43 percentage points below the national average. The region is also unique due to its low
population density: there are on average just ten people per square kilometre (km2) in
Papua, compared to a national average of around 134/km2 (Figure 3.3). The government’s
plans to electrify the island are multi-faceted: as a matter of priority, it seeks to bring basic
96

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

electrification to unserved villages (mostly in the island’s mountainous interior) through
off-grid solutions, while simultaneously working on providing the type of electricity
infrastructure in the medium to long term that it hopes will stimulate broader economic
development across Papua. Since 2011, 45 small-scale power plants, primarily solar
photovoltaic (PV) and hydropower, have been built on the island, connecting an additional
7 000 households. The first element of the government’s plans represents a significant
increase in ambition, including to electrify all remaining villages currently without access by
2019, before Papua hosts the National Sports Week in 2020, announcing projects to bring
electricity to an additional 170 000 households in the next three years. On average, there
are about 75 households in each of the villages to be electrified under this plan, and since
virtually none of them is in proximity to a network, off-grid solutions are expected to be the
quickest and least-cost method of achieving this part of the electrification plan.
The second element of the government’s plan for Papua includes building infrastructure to
meet increasing electricity demand from recently connected consumers. It includes adding
about 2.1 gigawatts (GW) of new capacity, mostly gas-fired plants (1.75 GW) to augment
the 610 megawatts (MW) of current capacity. Additional generation capacity in Papua will
be from hydropower of multiple sizes, geothermal and coal. The plan also includes
extending around 2 500 kilometres (km) of high-voltage transmission lines (70 kilovolt (kV)
to 150 kV) in Maluku and Papua. An important element of the strategy is to build mobile
gas-fired and dual oil-gas plants, often linked to small-scale regasification hubs for
shipments of liquefied natural gas (LNG). This allows Indonesia to utilise the gas from the
Tangguh LNG facility in West Papua, thereby bypassing the need to build costly pipeline
infrastructure for a limited and widely dispersed market (Figure 3.4).2 The levelised cost of
electricity generated at such facilities is estimated at around $145-200 per megawatt-hour
(MWh), around 75% less than the diesel alternative (Figure 3.5).3 In 2016, the Ministry of
Energy and Mineral Resources also introduced new regulations that are designed to allow
the private sector to gain access to “concession areas” in which they could act as an
integrated utility company (providing generation, transmission and distribution). These
networks are intended to rely heavily on renewables-based generation, and given that the
relatively small markets are not anticipated themselves to provide sufficient returns, the
government backs the scheme by ensuring a subsidy to bridge the difference between the
marginal cost of supply and the electricity tariff charged.
The case of Papua reflects a degree of pragmatism that combines innovative on-grid
solutions, with increasingly viable off-grid ones. However, if the long-term aim is to extend
grid access to those first reached by off-grid technologies, it is important at the formative
stages to design systems that would lead to the eventual integration of both systems, to
avoid the risk of costly replicated investments.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

2

Tokyo Gas, supported by Japan’s Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry, is currently assessing the
commercial viability of small-scale LNG and power projects, and their efficacy in displacing existing fuel-oil
power generation in islands in Indonesia and the Philippines.
3
We have presented a range in the levelised cost of electricity showing different fuel input prices and how
these impact the overall cost.

Chapter 3 | Addressing Southeast Asia’s energy priorities

97

3

Natural gas infrastructure has been identified as a central component in Indonesia’s energy access strategy

Indonesia’s natural gas-based electrification plans

Notes: LNG = liquefied natural gas; FSRU = floating storage and regasification units. “Virtual pipeline” refers to routes by which gas is delivered by ship, instead of
using pipelines. Source: LNG Infrastructure Roadmap 2016-2030 (MEMR, 2016).

Figure 3.4 ⊳

© OECD/IEA, 2017

98

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

Figure 3.5 ⊳

Comparative cost of electricity generation
by technology in Indonesia and Southeast Asia
Indonesia

Other Southeast Asia
Solar PV buildings
Utility-scale solar PV
Offshore wind
Onshore wind

3

Bioenergy
Hydropower
Geothermal
Oil GT
Gas GT
Gas CCGT
Coal supercritical
Stand-alone solar PV
Micro hydropower
Small diesel
Small gas GT
600 500 400 300 200 100

100 200 300 400 500 600
Dollars per MWh (2016)

A strong economic case exists for small gas-fired generation
and a range of off-grid solutions to extend access

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Notes: GT = gas turbine; CCGT = combined-cycle gas turbines. All values reflect regional averages,
representing a range of project level costs. Values for fossil fuels account for regional differences in capital
costs and fuel prices, but share common assumed capacity factors (15% for oil and gas GTs, 30% for small
gas GTs and small diesel, and 60% for gas CCGTs and coal supercritical). Micro hydropower refers to smallscale installations under 0.3 kilowatts (kW). Solar PV utility refers to large-scale, ground-mounted
installations, PV buildings refers to small-scale, roof-top solar PV installations and stand-alone solar PV refers
to small-scale decentralised solar PV installations under 0.2 kW coupled with a battery. For distributed
generation, a range of transport costs for fuels and project costs are represented: for small gas GTs, up to
$4 per million British thermal units (MBtu) additional fuel delivery costs; for diesel generators, up to 100%
additional fuel costs for delivery; for stand-alone solar PV, up to double installation costs due to delivery
costs to remote areas.

The situation in East Java differs significantly, with a population density more than 80-times
that of Papua (more than seven-times that of the European Union), and its relative
proximity to more developed areas in West Java and Bali. On average, each of the
225 villages recently electrified in East Java was only 13 km away from an existing grid, and
often far larger (the average number of households per village is nearly 100 and several
have over 1 000 households). These factors made it possible for grid extensions to form the
Chapter 3 | Addressing Southeast Asia’s energy priorities

99

bulk of new electricity connections in the government’s recent efforts to ensure electricity
connections to each of East Java’s villages, with fewer than ten villages connected to dieselpowered mini-grid systems (Figure 3.6). East Java’s village electrification initiative,
however, highlights a significant challenge to household electrification: despite all villages
in the region being successfully electrified, there remain around 4 million people in East
Java that lack access to electricity. This is largely due to the cost associated with household
connection (estimated at around $300 per household), which is prohibitive to many, and
highlights the importance of considering full costs for policy-makers looking to tackle
electricity access problems.
Our analysis of the size of each community and its distance from the existing grid, which we
conducted to formulate a comparison of costs against a range of on-grid and off-grid
solutions, shows that for the majority of people in East Java, on-grid solutions are the most
cost effective regardless of whether coal or gas is used to generate the electricity. For the
remainder, solar PV and other distributed generation technologies provide the least-cost
option.
Figure 3.6 ⊳

Villages recently electrified in East Java

Most villages in East Java were electrified through connections to the grid

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Sources: Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources, Indonesia; IEA analysis.

In this Outlook, Indonesia successfully deploys all the tools at its disposal to reach universal
electricity access in the mid-2020s. The associated investment is around $5.6 billion to
2025, about 85% of which is for new generation and about 15% for extending the grid.
Mini-grid and off-grid renewables-based generation play a fundamental role in extending
access and over 35% of the new consumers are served from solar PV, hydropower, biomass
100

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

or wind power sources (Figure 3.7). This is particularly the case in places like Papua. Gridbased coal-fired power generation also makes a notable contribution, providing a relatively
inexpensive solution in the more densely populated areas, though it could be limited by
concerns about air pollution from placing coal-burning plants close to population centres.
Small-scale gas-fired plants dotted along the coast of Papua are an interesting option as
they can provide reliable baseload capacity and are less polluting than coal. Such plants
could be supplied from domestic gas shipped in as LNG, thus avoiding the need for
expensive pipelines.
Figure 3.7 ⊳

New electricity access connections by technology
and fuel type in Indonesia, 2017-2025

Mini-grid and off-grid solutions account for more than 60% of connections
made in the period to 2025

3.1.2

The Philippines

© OECD/IEA, 2017

The Philippines has made significant progress in delivering electricity access, extending
access to 20 million since 2012, and boosting the household electrification rate to 91% in
2016. With around 5 million people gaining access per year, the Philippines is on track to
meet the target of achieving universal electrification by 2022, as set out in the Philippine
Development Plan 2017-2022. Thanks to the government’s effort, grid networks have been
extended throughout the main islands, Luzon, Visayas and Mindanao (Figure 3.8). Universal
access, however, remains challenging, particularly as the country has more than 7 000
islands. The problem is particularly acute in Mindanao, where around 60% of the
households that are currently without access are located (NEA, 2016).
The National Power Corporation (NPC) is the main institution responsible for “missionary”
electrification, which involves providing power generation in remote areas not connected
to the grid and that cannot be served in an economically viable way. (The rest of the power
sector was unbundled and privatised through the Electric Power Industry Reform Act of
2001). The government also allows private participation for rural electrification through
Chapter 3 | Addressing Southeast Asia’s energy priorities

101

3

schemes such as the Qualified Third Party Program, in which private sector companies,
accredited by the Department of Energy based on financial and technical criteria, can
provide rural electrification. These companies can also take over the power generation
assets of NPC, as the areas they serve develop markets that improve the economics of the
plants.
Figure 3.8 ⊳

Access solutions by type in the Philippines and Myanmar

Mini-grid and off-grid systems play a significant role in reaching the most remote
consumers in the Philippines, while off-grid technologies prevail in Myanmar

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Sources: KTH-dESA; IEA analysis.

In the missionary electrification areas, electricity is served by the Small Power Utilities
Group (SPUG) under the NPC. In 2015, SPUG had about 300 generating units with a total
capacity of 185 MW (NPC, 2016). Small diesel generation units or power barges, with
capacity ranging from less than 1 MW to 6 MW are predominantly used, accounting for
around 80% of total installed electrical capacity in the SPUG area in 2015. The heavy
reliance on diesel often causes blackouts and unplanned power outages. Moreover, due to
the high cost of fuel and logistical support for diesel plants, together with customers’
unwillingness or inability to pay for the electricity service in rural areas, more than 80% of
the plants in SPUG area generate electricity for less than 12 hours a day.

102

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

Due to the high cost of diesel power generation, the electricity price in the SPUG area is set
at a price below actual cost, necessitating the NPC to rely on subsidies to cover the gap. The
subsidies are funded by a surcharge paid by all other electricity consumers on a per-kWh
basis. Improved access to electricity and associated subsidies have pushed the surcharge up
four-times since 2003, to Philippine peso (PHP) 0.15/kWh ($0.003/kWh) in 2016. Together
with other surcharges for electricity consumers for environmental charges for watershed
rehabilitation and stranded contract cost for NPC, rising surcharges are a concern for
domestic industries that have to cope with electricity prices that already are among the
highest in Southeast Asia.
The heavy reliance on costly diesel power in the missionary area opens the possibility for
the country to explore the use of solar PV and wind power generation. To diversify the
sources of electricity, the government provides cash incentives, equivalent to about half of
the surcharge, to power providers that use renewables in the SPUG area. This provides
incentives for renewable energy developers, together with others stipulated in the
Renewable Energy Act of 2008, such as accelerated depreciation and duty-free import of
equipment. In addition to renewables, small-scale gas-fired plants fuelled by imported LNG
(as in Indonesia) have the potential to support access initiatives in the islands of the
Philippines. These units can provide reliable electricity supply at a lower cost than a diesel
alternative and are less polluting. The Philippines National Oil Company is considering a
natural gas infrastructure development plan with this objective in mind.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Geographically, Mindanao is one of the regions most afflicted with low access rates. It has
around 11 000 sitios (minimum administrative units) that are unserved with electricity,
accounting for half of the total unserved sitios in the Philippines. Mindanao is endowed
with renewable resources, particularly hydropower, which accounted for 38% of the
island’s total power generation in 2015. The Mindanao Development Authority received
290 renewable energy project applications totalling 3 GW as of 2015, of which hydro
accounted for around 70% of the capacity, followed by solar PV at about 430 MW
(Mindanao Development Authority, 2017). There is significant renewable energy potential,
but oil-fired power generation still accounted for one-third of total power generation in
Mindanao (compared with just 3-6% in Luzon and Visayas). Compounding this issue is the
fact that the missionary electrification projects in Mindanao rely entirely on small diesel
power plants or power barges run by bunker fuels. Given the high cost associated with the
use of oil in power generation (as well as its impact on local pollution), the case for
replacing oil with renewables is particularly strong in Mindanao.
Ramping up electricity supply capacity in a more cost effective and sustainable manner is a
vital area of the Philippines Development Plan 2017 – 2022. This includes plans to achieve
universal electricity access by 2022 by providing technical and financial support to electrify
the remote areas that remain without supply. The government is accelerating
electrification in Mindanao, both by on-grid and off-grid approaches, and by providing
grants to electric co-operatives (major distribution units in the remote areas) to help fund
their electrification projects. The European Union has provided financial support for
Chapter 3 | Addressing Southeast Asia’s energy priorities

103

3

residential solar systems in off-grid areas. Apart from the paucity of generation, Mindanao
also suffers from high grid system losses of around 13% in 2015, as well as from power
supply constraints, with a reserve ratio of around 3%, much lower than Luzon (13%) and
Visayas (12%).
The levelised cost of electricity (LCOE) analysis, which evaluates the relative delivered cost
of electricity across a range of technologies for the Southeast Asian countries, suggests that
there is considerable potential to lower the generation cost in remote areas by exploring a
range of off-grid generation technology options to move away from diesel-fired generation
(Figure 3.5). A dedicated site-by-site study is necessary to reflect diverse factors in remote
areas in the Philippines, including potential customer base, installation cost, capacity rate,
operational capability, available renewable resources and fuel prices.
Based on our analysis, the Philippines successfully attains universal access well ahead of
2030, effectively fulfilling the international commitments in the Sustainable Development
Goal 7. A range of technologies and solutions are deployed, but grid-connected generation
accounts for almost 90% of new connection to around 14 million additional consumers by
2030 (Figure 3.8). Off-grid and mini-grid technologies play a crucial role in remote areas, as
wind and solar PV provide around 1.5 million people with electricity access. The associated
investment totals around $14 billion, implying a cost of $1 000 per additional person
gaining electricity access.

3.1.3

Cambodia

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Cambodia’s electrification rate at 60% is the second-lowest among Southeast Asian
countries. This percentage belies a stark dynamic: among the urban population, which is
concentrated in Phnom Penh, 97% have access to electricity, while only 50% of the rural
population have electricity access (around 30% of rural households rely on batteries for
lighting). This underscores the issue of electrification as being synonymous with broader
rural development. In order to accelerate electrification, Cambodia has set a target of
achieving universal electrification to all villages by 2020 and for 70% of households
nationwide to be connected to the grid by 2030.
Any entity looking to supply electricity must first obtain a licence from Cambodia’s
Electricity Authority, which constitutes one the essential steps for electricity suppliers to
extend access to electricity. As of 2015, around 70% of 14 000 villages were covered by
areas where licences had been granted to electricity suppliers, (although this does not
necessarily mean that all of the villages covered by the electricity suppliers are ready to
supply electricity). The coverage of licenced electricity suppliers in provinces differs greatly,
as those with relatively large populations tend to have a large share of villages covered by
the licenced electricity suppliers (Figure 3.9). However, as of 2015, there were no provinces
fully covered by the licenced suppliers; the highest coverage was about 95% in Phnom Penh
and the lowest around 20% in Ratanakiri, a province in the northeast, underscoring the
massive scale of effort needed to achieve universal access.
104

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

One of the key elements that hamper the extension of electricity access is the issue of
affordability. In Cambodia, the tariff is determined based on the cost of electricity
generated or purchased from independent power producers (IPPs) or neighbouring
countries, plus distribution cost. To date, almost all installed capacity was built in Phnom
Penh, which accounted for more than 90% of installed capacity in 2015, leaving rural areas
to rely heavily on small diesel power generation and imports for electricity supply. This has
led to high electricity tariffs, which the government has responded to by introducing a fuel
cost adjustment mechanism to reflect changes in fuel costs, providing subsidies to small
consumers with monthly consumption of less than 10 kilowatt-hours (kWh), used mainly
for lighting. Nonetheless, the tariff to small consumers remains relatively high, at
Cambodian riel (KHR) 480/kWh ($0.113/kWh), higher than the average residential tariff in
Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand and Viet Nam (Electricity Authority of Cambodia, 2016).
Electricity tariffs are relatively higher in the provinces with lower electrification rates,
highlighting the need to improve affordability to further facilitate access to electricity. For
example, in Kratie and Mondul Kiri provinces, which are only 44% and 22% covered by the
electrical licences respectively, the electricity tariff was set in 2015 at
KHR 1 050 ($0.25/kWh) (Electricity Authority of Cambodia, 2016), higher than the tariff in
Phnom Penh which ranges from KHR 610 ($0.14/kWh) to KHR 820 ($0.19/kWh).

Thousand people

Figure 3.9 ⊳

Population and share of villages covered by licenced electricity
suppliers in each province in Cambodia

2 000

Phnom Penh

1 500
1 000
500

Kratie
Mondul Kiri

0
0%

20%

40%

60%
80%
100%
Share of villages covered by electricity licences

Cambodia is on its way to universal access, but there are still many provinces
with low populations that are not served by electricity suppliers

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Sources: Electricity Authority of Cambodia (2016); National Institute of Statistics, Cambodia (2015); IEA
analysis.

The large number of people that lack access to electricity are spread over a vast area, which
coupled with high electricity tariffs, suggests that grid extensions are to play a prominent
role in extending electricity access in a cost-effective manner in Cambodia (Figure 3.10). A
Chapter 3 | Addressing Southeast Asia’s energy priorities

105

3

grid network can distribute electricity to a broad area and integrate any fragmented small
existing networks, which helps to spread the cost of electricity supply across broader areas
and enhances security of supply.
Figure 3.10 ⊳ Electricity access by type in Cambodia

Cambodia deploys a variety of approaches to progress towards universal access

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Sources: KTH-dESA; IEA analysis.

Cambodia plans to build 2.8 GW of power generation capacity, almost entirely hydropower
and coal-fired plants by 2025, which can contribute to improve self-sufficiency of power
supply (Electricité du Cambodge, 2016). The national grid, including 230 kV transmission
lines, has been extended mainly in areas with relatively large populations to connect the
urban areas in the south and northwest. This facilitated a three-fold increase in the number
of consumers in just five years, from 672 000 in 2010 to 1.9 million in 2015 (Electricity
Authority of Cambodia, 2016). It also supplemented power supply in urban areas via
imports from Viet Nam and Thailand. Other high-voltage transmission lines from the south
to the northeast of the country are under construction, as part of the government’s
initiative to build high-voltage networks to serve all provinces and cities by 2020. Savings
can be achieved by reducing transmission and distribution losses, which in Cambodia are
high at 13.5% (Electricity Authority of Cambodia, 2016). The country is endowed with non106

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

hydro renewable resources, with the average daily solar irradiation of 5 kilowatt-hours per
square metre per day (kWh/m2/day) and wind speeds in the southwest and the coastal
regions averaging 5 metres per second or greater (Ministry of Mines and Energy, 2016).
However, the development of renewables-based power generation in Cambodia is in its
infancy, with no established policy frameworks to encourage their development.
Nonetheless, a financial agreement was reached in 2017 to introduce the first utility-scale
solar PV installation, with a capacity of 10 MW, in co-operation with the Asian
Development Bank (ADB, 2017).
In areas not served by the national grid, off-grid and mini-grid technologies are being used
to provide electricity access, together with imports from neighbouring countries. In isolated
areas, small diesel generators are predominant, serving around 22 000 consumers
(Electricity Authority of Cambodia, 2016). These are costly, with an average retail price in
2015 of $0.68/kWh, compared with $0.13-0.25/kWh for customers connected to the grid.4
A Rural Electrification Fund (REF), established by the Ministry of Mines and Energy,
provides assistance for infrastructure development and rural electrification through either
interest-free loans or grants to cover a portion of the project costs. The programme has
contributed to the expansion of transmission lines in rural areas, with more than 2 800 km
of low- and medium-voltage lines constructed as of 2016. For consumers, the REF includes
a “Power to the Poor” programme, which provides consumers with interest-free loans for
in-house wiring and equipment, connection fees and deposits required by electricity
suppliers. Financed with support from KfW (Germany’s development bank) and the
government of Cambodia, since 2008, Power to the Poor spurred a significant uptake of
solar home systems by providing a grant of $100 (roughly 50% of the cost of a 50 Watt
system) and interest-free loans of around $90.5 Together with another financial support
scheme for 5 Watt solar systems, it facilitated the installation of over 10 000 solar systems
in homes in 2016. The cost of electricity is high even with the grant, estimated at around
$0.23/kWh. The cost competitiveness of solar PV can be further improved by future
technology cost reductions, as well as by the potential rise in oil prices. As a result, off-grid
technologies, including renewables that tap Cambodia’s considerable hydropower potential
and solar resources, have a considerable role in extending access. In Cambodia, rice husk
feedstock is gasified and used as fuel to generate electricity for helping many rice mills in
rural areas operate at lower cost. Making use of local resources for productive purposes in
communities can provide social and environmental benefits, in addition to access to
electricity (Box 3.1).

© OECD/IEA, 2017

With limited financial capabilities in Cambodia, the role for development finance
institutions, international donors and the private sector to support building power
infrastructure is essential. So far, around 40% of Cambodia’s high-voltage transmission line
projects have been financed by international donors, including the World Bank and the
4

Interview in 2017 with Mr. T. Sokhamal, Director of the Department of Tariff and Monitoring of Licensee'
Accounts, Electricity Authority Cambodia.
5

Interview in 2017 with Dr. L. Keosela, Director of Rural Electrification Fund.

Chapter 3 | Addressing Southeast Asia’s energy priorities

107

3

Asian Development Bank. Around half of the 33 transmission system projects planned in
the period to 2025 are to be financed by international donors, including China’s Export
Import Credit Bank, France’s Development Agency and Japan’s International Cooperation
Agency (Electricité Du Cambodge, 2016). For generation facilities, IPPs account for around
90% of total installed capacity. As the grid extends and the customer base expands, the
economic viability of large power generation projects improves and the role of IPPs is
expected to enlarge to meet increasing electricity demand (Spotlight). The ensuing
reduction of electricity costs, stemming from the reduced reliance on small diesel
generators and imports from neighbouring countries could have additional benefits,
helping the country to leverage its relatively cheap labour costs to build new employment
opportunities in industries and services.
Based on our analysis, Cambodia successfully attains universal access by the early 2030s. To
do this at the lowest cost, it would need to rely heavily on-grid connections, which provide
the least-cost choice for connections for all but 3% of the 7.6 million new connections in
that timeframe. For those remaining without access, solar PV systems could help bring
power to around 240 000 people by 2030. The associated investment totals $9 billion,
implying a cost of $1 100 per additional person gaining electricity access.
Box 3.1 ⊳

Community-oriented approaches to extend electricity access

Providing electricity access does not end with providing a physical connection to a grid
or setting up generation facilities. Various factors need to be adequately considered to
ensure the sustainability of electricity access, including its affordability to consumers,
adequate financing mechanisms, capacity building for proper operation and
maintenance and the socio-economic implications of using more electricity. Around the
world, there are cases where power projects have ended up with installed plants
becoming unavailable after a short period, due to inadequate attention to these
elements (Ikejemba et al., 2017). Engagement of local communities in projects can help
to avoid these pitfalls and enhance their sustainability.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Thailand has introduced a “Community-based Renewable Energy Program” to support
projects initiated by local communities. It offers valuable insights into how to ensure
project sustainability through the engagement of local communities (Chaichana, 2017).
Through the programme, the Ministry of Energy, in co-ordination with Chiang Mai
University, provides financial assistance to renewables-based power generation
projects for small communities. The level of financing (ranging between 30-70% of the
cost), is determined in large part by the degree of engagement of local communities.
This is determined by assessing a range of factors, including the availability of local
energy resources, community ownership of facilities and the financial commitments
from local stakeholders such as farmers and industries.
Out of 285 proposals in 2013, twenty-six projects were selected. Eleven of them
involved power production from agricultural waste and create income for local
108

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

stakeholders by selling excess power to EGAT, Thailand’s national power company, via a
feed-in tariff (FiT) scheme that sets favourable rates for small projects. The primary FiT
rate applied for electricity from biomass-based generation capacity of less than
1 megawatt (MW) is Thai baht (THB) 5.84/kWh ($0.17), around 30% higher than the
rate for power from larger than 3 MW capacity.
Such projects have a number of associated benefits. They effectively clear waste and
the maintenance of the facilities creates employment opportunities in the local
community. Financial commitments from local stakeholders increase the sense of
project ownership, helping to ensure proper management. Creating such virtuous
circles in the local community can enhance the viability of projects.

3.1.4

Myanmar

Myanmar has made significant progress in extending electricity access since 2000, when
only 5% of the population had access, one of the lowest rates in the world. Efforts to
electrify the country have gradually increased, with around 1.8 million people gaining
access every year mostly through centralised, grid-based solutions, reflecting the fact that
the low access rate was generalised (and not accounted for solely by remote communities).
Despite this improvement, Myanmar’s electricity consumption on a per capita basis
remains one of the lowest in the world, at around 260 kWh/year, about 10% of the global
average. Nearly 22 million people remain without access to electricity. In absolute terms,
this puts Myanmar behind only Indonesia for the number of people without access to
electricity.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

The government of Myanmar established a target of reaching universal access by 2030 in
its National Electrification Plan. The majority of the additional 7.2 million households are to
be connected through a grid, at an estimated cost of $6 billion, a rate of $800 per
connection (World Bank, 2015). In the areas far from existing infrastructure and with low
population density, as in Shan and Thaninthayri, off-grid and mini-grid access solutions are
favourable with effective technology choices, and the World Bank is financing such projects
to reach 500 000 households by 2021.
In the New Policies Scenario, Myanmar successfully attains universal access by the early
2030s. While grid connections are the least-cost solution for around 40% of the 24 million
total new connections, Myanmar is the country among the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) members that could rely most heavily on renewables-based and off-grid
options, particularly solar PV due to the abundance of the resource and the large number
of people that live relatively far from the grid. Solar PV provides the least-cost connection
to around 11.8 million people over the period. The associated investment totals almost
$13 billion, implying a cost of around $525 per additional person gaining electricity access.

Chapter 3 | Addressing Southeast Asia’s energy priorities

109

3

S P O T L I G H T
How can electricity access projects be financed?
To date, the majority of the investment for electricity access in Southeast Asia has taken
a traditional grid extension approach. While this model will continue to play a central
role in the near term, the high capital costs of grid investments, combined with limited
public budgets and competing demands for development finance means that
decentralised mini-grid or micro-grid solutions could offer earlier solutions through new
business models to provide initial access.
Financing options for electricity access will vary depending on whether a centralised
grid extension or decentralised approach is taken. Under a centralised model, where a
state-owned utility is responsible for the investment, funding will likely come from a
combination of public funds, the utility’s budget, grants (or development aid) or
concessional funding from multilateral development banks, export credit agencies or
development agencies. In many cases, initial electricity access via grid extensions will be
driven by societal reasons and will not provide the cost recovery needed to attract
private sector investment. This can put additional strain on state-owned utilities that
may have competing budget needs. To address this issue, countries such as Thailand
and Indonesia have turned to the private sector and IPPs to meet the increasing need
for more generation capacity. Power purchase agreements are used to secure financing
from a combination of debt and equity. In some cases, where project risks are deemed
too high to be borne solely by the private sector, guarantee mechanisms provided by
national governments or multilateral development banks have been used.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Under a decentralised approach to expanding access to electricity, financing options
vary as the investment requirements are substantially lower and with the possibility of
new actors entering the scene. Public funds from local governments or as transfers
from the central government, funding from development banks and private funding
(debt and equity) can be used. Fiscal measures can also be used to support energy
investments.
In other regions such as South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa, new business models have
unfolded for decentralised electricity access projects where investors focus on the
delivery of services, e.g. lighting, cooling and cooking, versus solely on electricity supply.
By bundling the cost of electricity together with the end-use equipment, consumers can
access services quicker and may no longer need to save to purchase consumer goods.
Instead, small and medium enterprises (SMEs) are entering the market as energy
service providers who may be more adept at reaching isolated and rural systems than
large state-owned utilities. Funding from multilateral and bilateral development
institutions as well as social investors and philanthropic organisations can support the
development of local SMEs while at the same time helping to fund electricity access
projects (CEM, 2015).

110

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

The willingness of local villages and consumers to help fund or build electricity access
projects can also speed the rate of electrification. In the Viet Nam, for example, at the
peak of its rural electrification programme (1996-2000) household and local
government contributions financed 59% of total investments versus 40% by EVN, the
national power utility (ADB, 2011). Active involvement of rural communities in
electrification projects in Viet Nam also helped to overcome right-of-way and land
permitting issues that can delay developments.
In some circumstances, broadening the focus of electricity access projects beyond
households to include energy for productive uses6, and including such users in the focus
of energy access policies and investments can create a stronger business case for
investors and a greater impetus for policy-makers to improve access to electricity (IEA,
2017a).

3.1.5

The evolution of costs for access

The journey to universal electricity access across Southeast Asia is set to span many years,
with the changing dynamics of the energy market in that time, including the cost of diesel,
the rapidly falling cost of solar PV cells, and the growing viability and changing costs of
batteries all needing to be taken into consideration when assessing strategies for
electrification. While the relative cost of diesel-powered generators has already been
shown to be higher than just about any alternative, the choice between pursuing on-grid,
off-grid or mini-grid solutions and indeed dispatchable or variable renewables, is one where
the elements change over time and requires close attention.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

In the New Policies Scenario, the price of natural gas imported to Southeast Asia rises by
around 40% in the period to early 2030 (when universal electricity access is reached across
the region), to around $11/MBtu. This increase in cost is offset to a degree by increasing
efficiency of the power plants used to burn it, such that the impact on the overall cost of
electricity changes only slightly. The decreasing costs of PV cells have a much more
profound impact: in the New Policies Scenario, these decrease measurably to 2030, with
the potential of reducing the LCOE of solar PV in Southeast Asia from around $140/MWh
today to around $75/MWh in 2030. The price of diesel increases by around half in the
period to 2030, widening the already large gap in cost competitiveness between diesel
generation and nearly all the alternatives. For policy-makers, the changing costs of fuels
and technologies, as well as the environmental impact of their choices, will need to be
taken into account. Southeast Asia has a number of approaches at its disposal to meet its
energy access challenges, ranging from small-scale gas plants on islands fuelled with LNG
and traditional coal baseload capacity to solar PV and small hydropower. To meet their
6

“Productive uses” refers to activities that create goods or services and enhance income potential or value.
This includes income generation for agriculture, industry, mining and commercial activity, and through value
creation in terms of education and health, services that can improve peoples’ livelihoods and their potential
to capitalise on economic activity.

Chapter 3 | Addressing Southeast Asia’s energy priorities

111

3

considerable, but attainable, ambitions of universal access in a relatively short period of
time, countries in the region will need to effectively employ a mix of options that fit the
specific conditions.
Figure 3.11 ⊳ Levelised cost of electricity for selected technologies in
Indonesia and Southeast Asia in the New Policies Scenario, 2030
Indonesia

Other Southeast Asia
Utility-scale solar PV
Solar PV buildings
Stand-alone solar PV
Small diesel
Small gas GT
200

600
400
200
Dollars per MWh (2016)
2016 (median)

2030

400
600
800
Dollars per MWh (2016)

Range of 2030 costs based on transport costs

Rising costs of fossil fuels and falling costs for solar PV technology
improve its competitiveness in various scales of application

3.2

Implications of Southeast Asia’s energy development

Southeast Asia faces myriad energy challenges, a reflection of the fast-changing economies
and demographics, the imperative of extending affordable and secure energy to the
millions of people who lack access, plus the changing dynamics within the region as
traditional net exporters rely ever more on increasing imports. In this section, the New
Policies Scenario projections highlight a number of the challenges Southeast Asian
countries may face. The focus is on energy security and environmental issues, and the
investment necessary to meet growing energy demand while shifting to a more sustainable
pathway. We also examine the prospects for increased interconnection as a means of
meeting the shared challenges of countries across the region through better power and gas
integration.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

3.2.1

Implications for energy security

Southeast Asia’s large oil, natural gas and coal resources have allowed the region to enjoy a
long-term net energy export position, as evidenced in 2000 with exports values of more
than $9 billion. Falling exports (due to both increasing domestic consumption and declining
output of oil) and prices have taken a toll, with the trade balance moving to a large deficit
of almost $20 billion in 2016. These dynamics are expected to increase in magnitude in the
112

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

period to 2040, as oil demand rises by around 40% and natural gas consumption by almost
60%. At the same time, oil production falls by one-third and gas production remains
virtually level. The interaction of these dynamics results in a dramatic shift in energy trade
balances. Southeast Asia is expected to register a net deficit in energy trade of over
$300 billion in 2040, equivalent to around 4% of the region’s gross domestic product (GDP)
(Figure 3.12).
Figure 3.12 ⊳ Fossil-fuel trade balance in Southeast Asia in the

3

Billion dollars (2016)

New Policies Scenario
100

Coal
Gas

0

Oil
-100
-200
-300
-400
2000

2010

2020

2030

2040

A traditional net energy exporter, Southeast Asia’s oil and gas

© OECD/IEA, 2017

import bill reaches over $300 billion by 2040

Beyond the impact on trade balances, this large increase in imports raises energy security
concerns for countries across the region. On average, oil import dependency (the amount
of oil imported as a proportion of total demand) increases by 21 percentage points,
reaching 78% in 2040. The trend of Southeast Asia meeting its fast-increasing energy
demand through imports is expected to weigh significantly on policy-making over the
Outlook period. The current low oil price environment has been used by several
governments, including Indonesia, Thailand and Malaysia, to pass substantive reforms of
subsidies that have long been burdensome to the state. These measures alone dampen
demand growth, as energy is used more efficiently when its price properly reflects its full
cost. There are also policy developments in oil stockpiling to enhance energy security. In
2017, Viet Nam approved a master plan to develop an oil and oil product reserve system,
aiming to hold 90 days’ worth of net imports by 2020. Indonesia is considering measures to
strengthen fuel reserve regulation for the private sector. Several policy options remain
open to governments where changes would help alleviate the dual issues of energy security
and rising energy import bills. These include the possibility of a more efficient allocation of
capital for both supply- and demand-side energy investments and establishing closer
linkages across Southeast Asia to optimise management of energy systems.
Chapter 3 | Addressing Southeast Asia’s energy priorities

113

3.2.2

Environmental implications

Local air pollution7
Rising incomes, population and levels of energy access in Southeast Asia propel energy
demand growth to 2040. Annual growth of 2.1% in energy demand exceeds the global
average, although it is lower than in recent years due to slower economic and population
growth, a switch away from the traditional use of biomass and energy efficiency gains.
While all fuels contribute to meet energy demand growth, coal is the largest contributor,
driven by strong demand in the power sector, where coal overtakes natural gas to
dominate the electricity mix. In the New Policies Scenario, Indonesia alone accounts for
over 40% of total energy demand growth and of the increase in coal use. The share of the
population relying on the use of fuelwood and charcoal for cooking in the buildings sector
falls from almost 40% today to around 25% in 2040; but there are still more than
200 million people relying on the traditional use of solid biomass for cooking by 2040.
The projected robust rise in energy demand entails strong growth in sulfur dioxide (SO2)
and nitrous oxides (NOX) emissions. SO2 emissions grow by 40% over current levels, to
5.1 million tonnes (Mt) in 2040, driven by rising coal use in power generation, which
accounts for 60% of total SO2 emissions growth. NOX emissions rise by more than 50%, to
8.3 Mt in 2040, with two-thirds of the total growth attributable to increased coal use in the
power sector and rising oil use in transport (where car ownership goes up from around
55 cars per 1 000 inhabitants today to more than 80 per 1 000 inhabitants in 2040).
Although NOX emissions from the industry and power sectors grow faster, the transport
sector remains by far the largest source of NOX emissions in 2040, contributing more than
half of the total. Driven by less use of traditional fuelwood and charcoal for cooking,
emissions of fine particulate matter (PM2.5) decline slowly to around 2.2 Mt in 2040, 14%
below current levels, but households remain the largest source of PM2.5 emissions.
Pollutant emissions in Southeast Asia take a tremendous toll on health: ambient air
pollution is linked with over 300 000 premature deaths in 2040, a 70% increase from
current levels, while an equal number of premature deaths are associated with high levels
of household air pollution.

Climate change

© OECD/IEA, 2017

All ASEAN member countries have ratified the Nationally Determined Contributions they
submitted to the Conference of Parties in advance of the Paris meeting in 2015.
Commitments vary from increasing the share of renewables in the energy mix to increasing
forest cover, and generally countries accepted that they have a role to play in the global
effort to reduce greenhouse-gas (GHG) emissions.
The challenge in Southeast Asia is stark. The region, particularly its vast coastal areas and
thousands of islands, is particularly vulnerable to the effects of climate change and rising
7

The issue of air pollution in Southeast Asia is discussed in Energy and Air Pollution: World Energy Outlook
Special Report, available at: www.worldenergyoutlook.org/airpollution.

114

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

sea levels. The region’s growing economies need to be supplied with increasing amounts of
energy, and its people, not least those currently without electricity, need to be supplied
with affordable and secure energy. These imperatives underpin a continued role for
thermal power generation, including coal-fired power plants, in the Southeast Asian energy
system in the New Policies Scenario.
The power sector is the largest GHG emitter in Southeast Asia, and accounts for 55% of the
increase in total carbon-dioxide (CO2) emissions from the region to 2040 (Figure 3.13). In
this period, the emissions intensity of power generation decreases by almost one-fifth. This
reflects both the growing share of generation from low-carbon sources, from about 18% of
generation today to around 30% in 2040, and the use of more efficient coal generation
technology, particularly the use of supercritical and ultra-supercritical plants. Over the
Outlook period, the rate of growth in GHG emissions across the region is surpassed by the
rate of economic growth, delivering an almost 40% decrease in the carbon intensity of GDP.
Figure 3.13 ⊳ Energy-related CO2 emissions in Southeast Asia
2.5

100

2.0

80

1.5

60

1.0

40

0.5

20

2015

2020

2025

2030

2035

Index (2015 = 100)

Gt

in the New Policies Scenario
Gas
Oil
Coal
Carbon intensity
(right axis)
GDP
Power

2040

Energy-related CO2 emissions more than double to 2040,
but carbon intensity declines as the energy mix is diversified

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Southeast Asia has considerable opportunities to recast its energy sector to make it more
sustainable (see section 3.2.4). The region achieves far greater decarbonisation in the
Sustainable Development Scenario, while meeting its energy access targets and improving
air pollution. CO2 emissions drop slightly despite a three-fold increase in the size of the
economy in the period to 2040 (reflecting a two-thirds decrease in the CO2 emissions
intensity of economic output).

Chapter 3 | Addressing Southeast Asia’s energy priorities

115

3

3.2.3

Investing for a more secure energy system

Investment is vital in both energy supply and demand to mitigate security of supply
concerns and to transition to a more sustainable energy system. On the supply side,
ongoing investment is required in the upstream to slow declines in oil and gas production in
established areas like Indonesia and Malaysia, as well as to increase output in nascent ones
such as Thailand, Viet Nam and Myanmar. For the power sector, robust economic growth
and reaching universal access to electricity necessitates a step increase in the level of
investment. On the demand side, investment in efficiency across the end-use sectors has
the potential to significantly alter the demand outlook. In the New Policies Scenario, total
cumulative investment in energy supply infrastructure amounts to $2.1 trillion, of which
the power sector accounts for over half. The annual average investment requirement of
around $90 billion corresponds to around 3% of the region’s total GDP in 2016.
Table 3.1 ⊳

Cumulative investment in energy supply in Southeast Asia
in the New Policies Scenario (2016 $billion)
2017-2025

2026-2040

2017-2040

2017-2040
Annual average

Oil
Gas
Coal
Power
Fossil fuel
Nuclear
Hydropower
Bioenergy
Wind
Geothermal
Solar PV
T&D
Biofuels

146
120
14
387
82
46
11
9
7
26
207
7

206
303
25
855
149
9
99
21
34
10
62
470
18

352
423
39
1 242
231
9
145
32
44
17
88
677
25

15
18
2
52
10
0
6
1
2
1
4
28
1

Total energy supply

674

1 407

2 081

87

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Note: T&D = transmission and distribution.

Investment in fossil-fuel production and related infrastructure makes up around 40% of
total supply-side investment to 2040 in the New Policies Scenario, totalling around
$800 billion (Figure 3.14). Of this, more than half is for natural gas, with around $100 billion
required for pipelines and $30 billion for LNG facilities including for small floating
regasification terminals to supply gas to island networks in Indonesia. Investment in oil
infrastructure totals around $350 billion, a third of which is for refining, a significantly
higher proportion than the global average of 10%. The relatively higher share for refineries
reflects the need to expand capacity to meet increasing demand for oil products in the
region.

116

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

On the oil and gas exploration side, efforts are also made by several governments in the
region to encourage upstream investment, aiming to slow the hydrocarbon production
decline. Measures include tax incentives and adding flexibility in regulatory frameworks. In
2016, Indonesia revised regulations on import duties and tax treatment during the
exploration phase and the exemptions can be applied in the production phase if the project
meets the economic criteria. In 2017, Thailand’s legislature approved changes to energy
laws in order to broaden options beyond concessions such that companies can seek
production sharing or service contracts with the government in order to attract more
international energy firms and investors.
Figure 3.14 ⊳ Cumulative investment in fossil-fuel supply in Southeast Asia
in the New Policies Scenario to 2040
Oil:
Upstream
Refining
Transport

Oil
Gas:
Gas

Upstream
LNG
Transport

Coal

Coal:
Mining
Infrastructure
100

200

300

400
500
Billion dollars (2016)

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Among fossil fuels, natural gas requires the largest cumulative investment

Securing sufficient investment to meet Southeast Asia’s projected electricity demand poses
a major challenge. In the New Policies Scenario, the cumulative investment needed in the
power sector to 2040 is $1.2 trillion, an annual average of around $50 billion (Figure 3.15).
This corresponds to around 10% of total government revenue in Southeast Asia, or around
40% of total foreign direct investment in the region in 2015, illustrating the potentially large
burden on government budgets if there is not meaningful private sector participation.
Investment for transmission and distribution (T&D) accounts for over half of total power
sector investment, reflecting the substantial need to strengthen the current network, as
well as to extend grids for access and to meet rising demand in urban areas and to
refurbish existing T&D lines. About $570 billion of investment is needed for new power
plants, of which about 40% is for fossil-fuel plants and 60% for renewables-based
generation. Cumulative investment for renewables-based power generation amounts to
over $300 billion to 2040, of which around 45% is for hydropower and 40% for solar PV and
wind.
Chapter 3 | Addressing Southeast Asia’s energy priorities

117

3

Coal-fired power plants account for around 70% of the cumulative investment for fossil-fuel
plants, reflecting their expansion in the region and relatively capital-intensive nature.
Around 80% of the cumulative investment of coal-fired power plants, about $120 billion is
directed towards supercritical or other advanced technologies8, leading to the overall
efficiency of coal-fired plant fleet in the region to rise from 33% in 2015 to 38% in 2040.
Figure 3.15 ⊳ Cumulative investment in the power sector in Southeast Asia
in the New Policies Scenario

2017-2025

2026-2040

T&D

Fossil fuels

Renewables
100

Hydro

200 300 400 500
100 200 300 400 500
Billion dollars (2016)
Billion dollars (2016)
Bioenergy
Solar PV
Wind
Geothermal
Coal
Gas
Oil
T&D

In the power sector, investment in renewables surpass that of fossil fuels in Southeast Asia

Some Southeast Asian countries have relied heavily on IPPs to secure power supply, in part
due to the limited availability of capital for such investments. In Indonesia, where
traditionally the national utility, PLN, makes the necessary investments in power sector
infrastructure, IPPs now account for the largest share of investment (Box 3.2). This trend is
expected to continue, as Indonesia’s government plans to secure 70% of its additional
power generation to 2034 through IPPs and surplus electricity from captive power plants
owned by the private sector. Success of this approach depends largely on the nature of the
off-take agreements that underpin the investment. As such, it is vital that the retail price of
electricity fully reflects the cost of generating it.9

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Although private participation in power generation via IPPs is widely used in Southeast
Asian countries, their role in power markets is in many cases limited. For example, private
participation in retail power markets in the region is small. Only Singapore and the
Philippines have introduced wholesale electricity markets where the private sector can sell
electricity through competitive processes. There is room for Southeast Asian countries to
8

Including ultra-supercritical coal plants and integrated gasification combined-cycle plants.

9

Though this should not preclude measures needed to finance electricity access projects that would
otherwise not be commercially viable.

118

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

allow private sector participants to expand their role in power markets, which would help
attract the needed investments. Various regulatory reforms, including electricity market
deregulation, liberalisation of electricity pricing and the phase out of subsidies are essential
elements to promote private investment in the power sector.
In the New Policies Scenario, demand-side investment makes up around almost a quarter
of total cumulative energy sector investment to 2040. These investments, mostly in energy
efficiency technologies, are strongly geared towards road transport (around $330 billion)
and buildings (around $180 billion), helped by incentive schemes such as tax breaks for
more fuel efficient vehicles and soft loans for efficiency measures in buildings.
Box 3.2 ⊳

Lessons from Indonesia’s Fast Track and
35 GW Power programmes

Rapid expansion of the electricity sector is critical to support Indonesia’s economic
development and to expand electricity access. Recognising that the state utility, PLN,
alone would not be able to meet the necessary investments, the Indonesian
government implemented the Fast Track Programmes I and II (FTP I and II) and the
35 GW Power Programme.10 These initiatives facilitate private sector participation in
power generation through IPPs and public-private partnerships (PPP).11 PLN remains
the sole purchaser for the electricity produced.
As of June 2017, progress on the current 35 GW Power Programme has been slower
than planned with 23.5 GW contracted (0.8 GW operating; 14.2 GW constructed and
8.5 GW contracted but not yet constructed) and 12.4 GW in the procurement and
planning phase. Of the 35 GW target by 2019, PLN is responsible for about 11 GW and
IPPs are expected to build 24 GW. Projects developed by IPPs have a much higher
progress rate with 74% already contracted (2% operating; 37% constructed; and 35%
not yet constructed) compared to less than half of the PLN portion. The government
recently announced that completion would likely be delayed until 2025.
Created in 2009 to accelerate infrastructure development in Indonesia and to support
implementation of PPP schemes, PT SMI, an infrastructure financing company fully
owned by the government, provides equity and long-term debt financing, as well as
project development and advisory services. As of April 2017, PT SMI had helped to
secure financing for over 1.5 GW of additional power generation capacity and provided
electricity access to more than 1.7 million households (6.7 million people) (SMI, 2017).

© OECD/IEA, 2017

10

The Fast Track Programme I started in 2006 and FTP II in 2009 aimed to add 8.75 GW and 17.9 GW of new
generation capacity by 2010 (later delayed to 2015) and 2016 (still under development). The current 35 GW
Power Programme, started in 2015, aims to add 35 GW by 2019 to reach a total installed capacity of more
than 110 GW.
11

While the definition for IPP and PPP are effectively the same where both schemes involve private sector
arrangements for delivery of power, in the Indonesian context, a project is considered as a PPP if a
government guarantee is required to raise adequate financing.

Chapter 3 | Addressing Southeast Asia’s energy priorities

119

3

While the bulk of the electricity projects financed by PT SMI have been for coal- and
gas-fired generation, the company is also actively seeking opportunities to finance
renewable energy projects and to date has financed 248 MW of mini-hydro and hydro
projects. Seeking to access alternative sources of funding for green infrastructure, in
2016, PT SMI became the first and only national institution from Southeast Asia to be
accredited with the Green Climate Fund.12
Another important institution created to attract private sector investment is the
Indonesia Infrastructure Guarantee Fund (IIGF). Created in 2009, it provides guarantees
that are backed by Indonesia’s Ministry of Finance. IIGF, with authorised capital of
Indonesian rupiah 9 trillion ($1 billion), provides a single window for project developers
of PPP projects for submission, appraisal and approval of guarantees. Its main function
is to enhance transparency and accountability in the provision of government
guarantees by applying international standards for due diligence in assessing regulatory
risks of PPP projects. Government guarantees are crucial to the bankability of projects
that are considered high risk due to either their size or where new technology is used.
The government also has established the Viability Gap Fund (VGF) to reduce the
investment cost of projects with high project development and construction costs or
low returns (i.e. electricity access). For example, the VGF’s Geothermal Revolving Fund
is where the private sector can access dedicated funds, which are repaid when the
project starts commercial operations.
Lessons learned from the implementation of FTP I and II led to a number of new
regulations in 2015 that help to address regulatory issues. In particular, on land
acquisition and rights, which have been leading causes of project delays. Enhanced coordination between various government institutions, establishment of “One Stop
Service of Permitting” at the Investment Coordinating Board Agency and accelerated
government approval procedures for business applications have also facilitated project
development.
Given the magnitude of investment needs for the power sector in countries such as
Indonesia, international financial markets play a vital role. Yet the global financial crisis
in 2008 highlighted the risks of dependence on international financial markets (with
escalating project costs denominated in foreign currency) and the importance of the
availability of local financing (as witnessed in China’s impressive power sector build
out), and in particular local long-term debt instruments to support power sector
expansion.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Indonesia’s experience in attracting private sector financing has important lessons for
other Southeast Asian countries that adopt a similar single-buyer electricity market
model. An evaluation of 56 power projects implemented mainly as part of the FTP I
12

The GCF was set up under the framework of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
to assist climate adaptation and mitigation practices in developing countries.

120

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

and II and early projects under the 35 GW programme, found that projects under PPPs
versus traditional utility procurement demonstrated superior results in terms of both
time and performance (Figure 3.16). On average, no significant cost differences were
observed between PPPs and traditional procurement projects nationwide. But, as
opposed to less-developed areas, the Java-Bali region had better cost performance
because it has larger projects and a higher share of industrial consumers that tended to
attract more experienced project sponsors.

3

Figure 3.16 ⊳ Project costs and completion times for PPP and PLN power

Relative cost performance

projects in Indonesia
2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5
0.0

0.2

Traditional

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.2

1.4

PPP experienced sponsors

1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
Relative time performance
PPP emerging sponsors

PPPs have fared considerably better in terms of cost performance and completion times
Source: Atmo et al. (2017).

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Both traditional procurement and PPP projects experienced delays, (85% for traditional
procurement versus 54% for PPPs) (Atmo et al. 2017). PPP projects showed significantly
higher availability factors linked to operating performance and service payments in the
contractual arrangements. Experienced project developers, particularly foreign
developers, tended to favour clean energy technologies such as renewables and highly
efficient combustion technologies, helping to accelerate deployment and technology
transfer.
PPP projects tend to be located in the high demand regions of Java, Bali and Sumatra,
while projects allocated for PLN development are in less-developed regions such as
eastern Indonesia and are generally associated with electricity access programmes.
Export credit agency funding has played an important role in accessing affordable credit
for foreign developers. In general, most PPP projects have been financed through 30%
equity and 70% debt; many have been funded without the need for government
guarantees as the project economics were sufficiently attractive to secure financing. In
contrast, projects developed by PLN may not meet cost recovery requirements and
Chapter 3 | Addressing Southeast Asia’s energy priorities

121

hence require support to finance them from the government, and multilateral and
bilateral development institutions. PLN’s ability to raise debt is currently limited due to
existing covenants linked to outstanding liabilities and the company has trouble raising
finance in a timely manner, which has also led to project completion delays. As a stateowned enterprise, PLN is also subject to cumbersome administrative procedures that
have led to financing difficulties and slowed progress on PLN’s generation projects.
Indonesia’s experience shows that institutional arrangements to facilitate infrastructure
investments including dedicated funding and government guarantees played an
important role in creating bankable projects that attracted private investors. Project
performance was better with experienced project developers and with contractual
arrangements that linked operational performance with payment. Other lessons include
the need for means to manage regulatory risks and the availability of local debt
financing in order to realise ambitious power sector developments.

3.2.4

Investment needs for a more sustainable energy path

© OECD/IEA, 2017

The path towards a more sustainable energy future for Southeast Asia in which countries
move towards decarbonising their energy systems while at the same time improving air
quality for all, requires a notable increase in the amount of investment and a fundamental
shift in its direction (Figure 3.17). An additional $300 billion of cumulative energy supply
and efficiency investment is needed in the period to 2040 in our Sustainable Development
Scenario relative to the New Policies Scenario, and is directed away from oil, gas and coal
production (where investment falls by around 30% compared to the New Policies Scenario),
and towards efficiency (+50%) and the power sector (+20%). The fuel mix for power
generation shifts with renewables accounting for more than 60% of total generation by
2040, compared with 30% in the New Policies Scenario, as increased deployment of wind,
solar PV, geothermal and hydropower displace the share of coal, which falls to 6%
compared with 40% in the New Policies Scenario. Variable renewables account for onequarter of total electricity production in Southeast Asia in 2040 in the Sustainable
Development Scenario. This penetration level requires not just large-scale grid expansion
and the deployment of flexible electricity supply technologies, but also additional
integration measures such as storage and demand-management options (through either
load shifting or load shedding).13 Efficiency gains across the board imply that electricity
demand is 8% lower in the Sustainable Development Scenario than in the New Policies
Scenario, but the power generation fleet is almost 20% larger (an additional 110 GW). This
is necessary to account for lower capacity factors of some renewable capacity and the need
for additional dispatchable generation to integrate higher shares of wind and solar PV (each
accounting for 12% of electricity generation).

13

Issues associated with variable renewables integration were explored in depth in World Energy Outlook2016 (IEA, 2016).

122

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

Figure 3.17 ⊳ Cumulative energy investment in the New Policies

Efficiency

NPS

Fuel
supply

NPS

Power
sector

and Sustainable Development Scenarios, 2017-2040

NPS

Efficiency

SDS
Oil
Gas
Coal
Biofuels

SDS

3

Renewables
Fossil fuels
Nuclear
T&D

SDS
400

800

1 200
1 600
Billion dollars (2016)

Energy investments are redirected to efficiency and low-carbon sources
in the Sustainable Development Scenario
Note: NPS = New Policies Scenario; SDS = Sustainable Development Scenario.

The change in investment emphasis in the Sustainable Development Scenario and the
fundamental reorganisation of the energy system that this brings significantly reduces
energy-related GHG emissions in Southeast Asia. In this scenario, GHG emissions peak
around the mid-2020s, then begin to fall, and are almost half the level in the New Policies
Scenario in 2040.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Associated with the fundamental shift in the way energy is produced and how much more
efficiently it is used in the Sustainable Development Scenario is the impact on energy
security (Figure 3.18). In this scenario, electrification and increased fuel-economy standards
have a profound impact on transport, with the consequent fall in oil used in road transport
leading to an overall 20% decrease in oil demand compared with the New Policies Scenario
(in the Sustainable Development Scenario, oil demand peaks by 2030). This is reflected in a
one-quarter reduction in oil imports by 2040, and along with around 50% decrease in
natural gas imports, amounts to around $175 billion per year savings on fossil-fuel imports
in 2040. The average annual fuel import savings is several times larger than the $14 billion
per year increase required to move Southeast Asia from the New Policies Scenario to the
Sustainable Development Scenario trajectory.

Chapter 3 | Addressing Southeast Asia’s energy priorities

123

Figure 3.18 ⊳ Comparison of selected energy indicators in the
Sustainable Development and New Policies Scenarios, 2040
Final energy consumption
NPS
SDS
200

400

600

800
Mtoe

150

300

450

600
g CO2/kWh

100

200

300

400
Billion dollars

Carbon intensity of power generation
NPS
SDS

Energy import bill
NPS
SDS

The Sustainable Development Scenario decreases energy
import dependency and lowers the energy import bill
Note: PG = power generation; NPS = New Policies Scenario; SDS = Sustainable Development Scenario;
g CO2/kWh = grammes of carbon dioxide per kilowatt-hour.

Energy efficiency – a key element for cleaner transition and security

© OECD/IEA, 2017

The transition associated with the Sustainable Development Scenario indicates that a
considerable amount of energy savings potential remains even compared to the gains
achieved in the New Policies Scenario. Total final energy consumption in the Sustainable
Development Scenario is around 20% lower, although the same economic and population
growth assumptions are applied in both scenarios. As shown in Chapter 2, Southeast Asian
countries have made efforts to improve efficiency in end-use sectors through measures
such as labelling programmes and incentives to purchase efficient vehicles. Such initiatives
have been pursued to varying degrees: energy efficiency strategies are completely lacking
in several countries, while others have introduced energy efficiency labelling for only a very
limited number of products. The share of energy consumption in end-use sectors covered
by efficiency measures in Southeast Asia is lower than the global average (Figure 3.19).
On the other hand, awareness of the value of efficiency gains, from consumer and from
policy-maker perspectives, has been increasing. Many countries now realise the potential
for efficiency to reduce subsidy burdens on budgets and to relieve strains on the energy
system in general – including environmental and energy security concerns. This becomes
124

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

increasingly important in our Outlook, as declining oil production and rising demand
heightens policy-makers’ concerns of the challenges associated with increasing import
dependency, increased energy import bills and increased capital requirements to invest in
energy supply. Efficiency measures also offer benefits in alleviating some air pollution
issues, which are affecting quality of life in urban areas across the region.
Figure 3.19 ⊳ Share of energy consumption in end-use sectors covered by
energy efficiency regulation in Southeast Asia, 2016
50%

Southeast
Asia

40%

World

30%
20%
10%

Industry

Transport

Residential

Services

Coverage of energy efficiency regulation in Southeast Asia
is lower than the global average

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Sources: Analysis based on energy data from: IEA (2017b); IEA (2017c); IEA (2016). Policy data based on: IEA
(2017d); CLASP (2017); EES and Maia Consulting (2014); IEA 4E-TCP (2016-2017); IIP (2017); BCAP (2017);
GBPN (2017); Odysee-Mure (2017); Siemens (2015) and ICCT (2017).

In the Sustainable Development Scenario, the switch from traditional biomass to liquefied
petroleum gas (LPG), natural gas and electricity in households to achieve universal
electricity access by 2030 increases energy service demand relative to the New Policies
Scenario, but efficiency measures such as mandatory labelling systems for a broad range of
appliances more than offset the demand increase, together with the savings from the fuel
switching (Figure 3.20). In the transport sector, electric vehicles are more widely purchased,
leading to some energy savings, but broader adoption of efficiency measures such as fueleconomy standards adopted across the region also play a role in saving energy. In industry,
bioenergy use rises marginally, which leads to a slight increase in energy consumption, but
efficiency measures such as energy management systems and audits bring about
substantial savings relative to the New Policies Scenario. The net impact of increased
efficiency in the Sustainable Development Scenario vis-à-vis the New Policies Scenario is a
14% decrease in overall energy consumption. All end-use sectors contribute, though the
industry sector accounts for about half of the efficiency gains.

Chapter 3 | Addressing Southeast Asia’s energy priorities

125

3

Figure 3.20 ⊳ Energy savings by end-use sector in the Sustainable
Development Scenario relative to the New Policies Scenario,
2040
Mtoe

10
Energy service
demand

0
- 10

Efficiency savings

- 20
- 30

Fuel and technology
switching

- 40

Net change

- 50
- 60

Buildings

Transport

Industry

In the Sustainable Development Scenario, efficiency improvements
play a substantial role in saving energy

3.2.5

Energy systems interconnection to bolster energy security

Prospects for power systems interconnection

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Increasing energy connectivity among the Southeast Asian countries has been a
fundamental goal for decades. While these long-standing objectives cover a number of
areas, key among the infrastructure aims is to increase the level of electricity
interconnection. To this end, in 1997, the countries agreed to develop the ASEAN Power
Grid (APG) to play a number of roles, including: increasing energy security by connecting
countries with surplus power to those with a deficit and optimising resource sharing
between countries so that peaking plants are used communally (where countries have
different demand profiles). A further benefit of grid interconnection is to improve the
economics of power system development, allowing for the more efficient development of
large-scale power system infrastructure and making it easier for countries to increase
access to electricity. In several low-income countries that have large, untapped renewable
energy resources, particularly large hydropower, there is insufficient demand in the
proximity to justify development; interconnection could expand the service area sufficiently
to underpin development. In others, interconnection could help manage variability issues in
the power system. For example, Viet Nam with its significant wind potential could benefit
by leveraging hydro resources in Lao PDR to balance the variability of wind generation.
Today there are nine cross-border interconnections with a combined capacity of 5 200 MW
(Hermawanto, 2016). They connect: Malaysia and Singapore; Malaysia and Thailand;
Malaysia and Indonesia; Lao PDR and Thailand; Lao PDR and Viet Nam; and Viet Nam and
126

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

Cambodia. Notably, most of these interconnections are in the northern region, except for
the one that connects Malaysia’s Sarawak region to Indonesia’s West Kalimantan and the
one connecting Malaysia to Singapore. One of the most well established examples of a
regional multilateral power exchange exists in the Greater Mekong Sub-region, which links
the northern region to the southern Chinese provinces of Yunnan and Guangxi. It has eight
cross-border interconnections with a combined capacity of 3 215 MW (Nai, 2015). Another
model for APG power trade is outlined in an agreement announced in 2017 between
Lao PDR, Thailand and Malaysia with plans for Malaysia to import 100 MW of power from
Lao PDR by 2018, wheeled through existing interconnections in Thailand to minimise costs.
Since it was conceived in the late 1990s, development of the APG has proceeded in a
piecemeal fashion. Although a number of interconnections have been developed and the
overall level of interconnection has increased, they have been built exclusively on a
bilateral basis, using a number of business models. Little progress has been made on the
establishment of a regional (or even sub-regional) multilateral power market. Trading is
generally driven by concerns over domestic resource availability or a desire to increase the
diversity of the generating fleet. It is mostly done on the basis of an agreement between
utilities, in which they jointly develop cross-border infrastructure and establish an
operating plan. Often these trades are on a non-economic basis, with no price associated
with the power exchange and instead power flows are netted out to zero over time. This is
the model employed by Singapore and Malaysia. Another model is a direct power purchase
from a generator, usually an IPP, located near a national border wherein the importing
utility may co-ordinate with the exporting utility, but it is also possible for an IPP to be
directly connected to the importing country’s network. This approach has been used to a
notable degree by Thailand to import hydropower from IPPs in Lao PDR.

Moving forward towards a more interconnected electricity market

© OECD/IEA, 2017

The ASEAN Power Utilities Authority (HAPUA), which is responsible for developing the APG,
has identified three regional priorities for interconnections: the northern region, which
includes five ASEAN countries (Cambodia, Lao PDR, Myanmar, Thailand and Vietnam); the
southern region, which includes peninsular Malaysia, Singapore and most of Indonesia; and
the eastern region, which includes Malaysian Borneo, Indonesian Borneo, Brunei
Darussalam and the Philippines.
Although power network interconnection is a stated objective of policy-makers across
Southeast Asia, a concrete plan laying out the steps to achieve this aim has not been
developed.14 Instead, countries agree on general principles of the need to harmonise
regulatory frameworks and standards, and on two broad strategies. The first, outlined in
the master plan, states that HAPUA will work to accelerate the development of three
priority APG projects: Lao PDR and Cambodia; Sarawak and Brunei Darussalam; and the
Melaka–Pekan Baru Interconnection (connecting peninsular Malaysia to Sumatra,
14

Power interconnection features prominently in the “Masterplan on ASEAN Connectivity in 2025” and the
“ASEAN Plan of Action for Energy Cooperation (APAEC) 2016-2025”.

Chapter 3 | Addressing Southeast Asia’s energy priorities

127

3

Indonesia). The second strategy states that HAPUA will establish a pilot multilateral trade
among three or more Southeast Asian countries. To this end, a Special Task Force has been
established and it is to develop a feasibility study to determine whether and how a
multilateral trade arrangement might be established. The proposed Laos-Thailand-Malaysia
power trade is the most likely candidate for this pilot, though other projects may be
considered.
Figure 3.21 ⊳ ASEAN power grid plans

Power network interconnections help Southeast Asia to enhance security,
as well as to tap renewable resources

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Source: Ibrahim (2016).

One important item not highlighted in the ASEAN Plan of Action for Energy Cooperation is
the need to strengthen the role of regional institutions. HAPUA, for example, has been
given a broad mandate for supporting development of the APG and of the multilateral
trade pilot, but it has a relatively small number of staff and limited resources. It also has
128

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

limited ability to influence the development of regulations. The most relevant institution in
that regard is the ASEAN Energy Regulators Network, but it has no mandate or staff.
Establishing a regulators network secretariat and giving it a mandate to work with national
regulators on harmonising regulations while respecting national sovereignty would be a
positive step towards supporting regional grid interconnection.

Prospects for greater natural gas integration
The role of gas in meeting growing energy demand in Southeast Asia and its increasing role
in the Sustainable Development Scenario as an important source of flexibility in the power
sector is highlighted in Chapter 2. Over the period to 2040, the natural gas production and
demand picture changes considerably; Thailand and Malaysia are likely to see declining
production and increasing imports, while Indonesia and Myanmar see increasing
production, but also a doubling of demand. The region as a whole moves from being a large
net exporter of over 50 billion cubic metres (bcm) (by pipeline and LNG) to a net importer
as soon as 2025, with almost one-quarter of demand imported (over 60 bcm) in 2040 in the
New Policies Scenario. Moreover, gas import bills are expected to reach around $26 billion
in 2040, compared with a trade surplus of $14 billion in 2016. Even these figures do not
convey the true size of gas trade, since it is likely that inter-country and intra-regional trade
will also grow. These demand and trade projections highlight potential security and
affordability issues with respect to Southeast Asian gas supplies in the period to 2040.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

The experience of natural gas disruptions among IEA member countries, for example in the
United States in 2005 and in Europe in 2006 and 2009, highlighted a number of lessons. A
key factor in coping with breakdowns in supply is a widespread network of delivery
infrastructure that is flexible (i.e. gas can be routed via various pathways and pipelines can
be reversed). Flexible markets, supported by harmonised regulation across wide geographic
areas, are also important. The United States showed an ability to move gas quickly and
directed reduced supplies to the highest value users, sustaining supply in the face of
dramatically reduced production. In Europe, in areas where gas supplies could be delivered
through extra LNG deliveries or storage drawdown, supply security was maintained. Where
infrastructure was based on one or two pipelines, supply security suffered.
The lessons for Southeast Asia are clear. As gas imports rise, better interconnections of
pipeline networks, analogous to the discussion on electricity networks, both within and
between countries, offers the possibility of much improved supply security. For this to be
realised, market flexibility would also need to improve markedly, to help establish effective
incentives for investment in infrastructure. Today there are thirteen bilateral pipeline
interconnections in the region, in addition to a major export line from Myanmar to China.
Southeast Asia also has five major LNG production facilities, plus a number of LNG import
facilities, notably in Thailand, but also peninsular Malaysia, Singapore and West Java. The
region has the ability to utilise the rapidly evolving technology of floating liquefaction and
regasification units to complement pipeline enhancements, particularly among islands (see
section 3.1). Four such facilities currently are being built and more are planned as they can
Chapter 3 | Addressing Southeast Asia’s energy priorities

129

3

deliver affordable, fast and flexible liquefaction and regasification to small and hard-toreach markets. Malaysia recently brought the world’s first floating LNG production unit
online.
Southeast Asia is well endowed with natural gas resources. Pipeline and LNG facilities exist,
however, they do not resemble the depth and flexibility of the IEA regions noted above, nor
do market and trading come close to the levels commensurate with Southeast Asia’s needs.
For example, third-party access, a key determinant of flexibility (and indeed contestability,
to ensure prices are determined by markets) is almost entirely absent from Southeast Asia
(though Thailand is in the process of liberalising its gas market, including third-party
access). The type of transparent hub-based trading, seen for example in North America and
Europe, is almost completely lacking in the Asia-Pacific region, although a number of
attempts are being made to establish such hubs (Spotlight). Hub-based trading offers
significant energy security advantages in the event of supply disruption or even a sudden
upsurge in demand, for example in the power sector. In addition, it benefits important
price discovery functions to ensure the most affordable prices, particularly as global gas
markets look to be in oversupply into the medium term. So far, however, Southeast Asian
gas markets rely on oil-indexed prices.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

For these reasons, interest in a Trans ASEAN Gas Pipeline (TAGP) to establish multilateral
pipeline interconnections is strong. The project has been entrusted to the association of
national oil companies (ASCOPE) in the Southeast Asia region. Where countries have no
national oil company, the government authority in charge of petroleum issues is
represented. Petroliam Nasional Berhad (PETRONAS), Malaysia's fully integrated oil and gas
multinational company, is the lead agency. Its Peninsular Gas System, which links to
Thailand, and a joint development area between the two countries, would likely form the
spine of a TAGP. Since 2012, the project has also recognised the potential role of LNG,
notably for those areas where undersea pipelines may prove impractical. The option of
using an LNG import terminal to supply a local pipeline network is also being studied. The
barriers to advancing this project are important, and include:


Harmonising technical issues, such as gas quality rules. For example, Singapore allows
only 5% CO2, while Thailand allows 13%.



Unifying market structures, pricing and some subsidies, which currently differ across
the region. Vertically integrated monopolies in some countries contrast with freer
trade in others.



Producing a multilateral pipeline system from a number of existing bilateral systems.



Creating and harmonising a flexible third-party access code across the region,
considered crucial for a fully functioning network. Countries in Southeast Asia have
varying hydrocarbon production and leasing arrangements, which have evolved over
many decades and present significant obstacles to TAGP.

130

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

S P O T L I G H T
Development of a gas hub in Singapore
Hub-based trading has become a feature of gas markets in North America, the United
Kingdom and increasingly in Europe. Such hubs provide a focus for physical gas trading,
leading to more accurate price discovery through publicly available price reporting,
backed by robust governance and regulation to improve confidence. Such indices allow
more advanced trading forms such as swaps, derivatives and futures, enabling risk to be
better managed (for example, by allowing producers to lock in certain price levels, thus
facilitating production investment, or buyers to purchase gas for a set time period and
price). Disruptions to supply and demand can be met by rapid adjustments, thus
enhancing security of supply and affordability. Successful hubs have a high degree of
liquidity, at both physical and financial levels, numerous buyers, sellers and
intermediaries, including strong financial players, access for all participants to essential
transport and storage infrastructure, and low transaction costs, through standardised
contracts and dispute resolution procedures. Government price controls and other
types of regulatory interventions must be absent, except those facilitating hub trading,
notably rules enforcing access to infrastructure, so called open access.
Gas trading in the broad Asia-Pacific region lacks this style of transparent hub trading.
The Asia-Pacific’s geographic diversity and relatively high dependence on LNG for gas
supply, where oil linked pricing and rigid destinations clauses persist, (at least for the
medium term) and transparency is low, have made flexible trading and more accurate
price discovery difficult. Nonetheless, several centres are being advanced as a basis for
hub-based trading in the region, including Singapore.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Singapore has made important moves towards liberalising its gas market, providing the
basis for more competitive price setting. These moves include creating a wellfunctioning domestic market for gas and greater transparency. A spot market for local
use of gas is being created, including secondary markets for gas consumers, and thirdparty access to facilities such as gas storage is also under development. These moves
put Singapore ahead of most countries in the Asia-Pacific region in terms of progress
towards conditions that might enable a hub-style market to develop.
Looking at the role of Singapore in the oil market, its refining capacity of around
1.5 million barrels per day, its position astride major oil trade routes and relatively high
levels of transparency have given Singapore a prominent position as far as price
discovery is concerned. A strong regulatory regime and a large financial sector also
underpin its position. This is especially so for oil product prices, such as gasoline, where
no other comparable markers exists in the Asia-Pacific region. For these reasons,
Singapore has become a major trading hub for oil and other commodities. But can it
duplicate this approach for LNG or gas more widely?
Gas demand in Singapore has risen rapidly to 12 bcm, of which almost 90% is for power
generation. With no production, imports come chiefly by pipeline from Indonesia
Chapter 3 | Addressing Southeast Asia’s energy priorities

131

3

(7.4 bcm), Malaysia (1.4 bcm) and as LNG from Qatar, Trinidad and Tobago, and
Equatorial Guinea. LNG storage capacity, at around 540 000 cubic metres appears large,
but is very small relative to the region’s gas markets. While a substantial portion of LNG
shipping passes nearby, (as much as half of current global LNG cargoes), the small size
of the Singapore gas market, and that for LNG, may make it much harder to duplicate
the trading success of Singapore with respect to oil for LNG. Its distance from the major
markets of Japan, Korea and increasingly China may further militate against successful
trading hub development, given higher transport costs for LNG relative to oil. Singapore
is promoting itself as a site for bunkering and trans-shipment of LNG cargoes, for
example to smaller isolated power facilities, a role it would appear well placed to
assume. This will help offset some of the drawbacks noted above.
Nonetheless, dating from late 2014, LNG pricing indices have been created by SGX (the
Singapore Exchange) and its subsidiary EMC (the Energy Market Company, operating as
an exchange for wholesale electricity trade in Singapore). Two such indices have been
created, known as the Singapore LNG Index Group, or SLing. The first is designed to
reflect the spot price of LNG cargoes in the vicinity of Singapore, as a proxy for southern
Asian seaborne LNG. The second is designed to reflect the price of delivered bulk LNG
cargoes (135 000 - 175 000 cubic metres) in North Asia (Japan, Korea, Chinese Taipei
and China). These assessments are based on regular input from 50 reporting entities,
including oil and gas majors, LNG or gas producers, plus LNG importers and traders: the
latter group dominate. A third index, designed to reflect South Asian prices (the
Dubai/Kuwait/India or DKI SLing) has been developed more recently. Indices are
published twice weekly. Despite the relatively small number of participating entities,
the standard deviation of indices has continued to fall, indicating probable growing
convergence and robustness of the indices. The index does not depend on cargoes
actually being landed in Singapore, so does not represent a physical market.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

These indices certainly provide some visibility on LNG trade in the Asia-Pacific region.
However, the extent that these indices are used in trading, price setting or contracting
remains to be seen. Furthermore, hopes that SLing swaps and derivatives trading might
be introduced as next steps in hub trading, remain subject to regulatory approval. For
such a trade to succeed, the market must first acknowledge the value of the indices,
and be prepared to adopt them in hedging, risk management and futures trading. Based
on experience elsewhere, these will take some time to emerge, develop and be widely
adopted.

132

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

Annex A
Southeast Asia projections
General note to the tables
The tables detail projections for fossil-fuel production, energy demand, gross electricity
generation and electrical capacity, and carbon-dioxide (CO2) emissions from fossil-fuel
combustion in the New Policies, Current Policies and Sustainable Development Scenarios in
ASEAN member countries, which include Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia,
Lao PDR, Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Viet Nam. By
convention, in the table headings CPS and SDS refers to the Current Policies and
Sustainable Development Scenarios respectively.
Data for fossil-fuel production, energy demand, gross electricity generation and
CO2 emissions from fuel combustion up to 2015 are based on IEA statistics,
(www.iea.org/statistics) published in World Energy Balances, CO2 Emissions from Fuel
Combustion and the IEA Monthly Oil Data Service. Historical data for gross electrical
capacity are drawn from the Platts World Electric Power Plants Database (April 2017
version) and the International Atomic Energy Agency PRIS database (www.iaea.org/pris).
The formal base year for this year’s projections is 2015, as this is the last year for which a
complete picture of energy demand and supply is in place. However, we have used more
recent data wherever available, and we include – for the first time – our 2016 estimates
(2016e) for energy production and consumption in this annex. Estimates for the year 2016
are derived from a number of sources, including latest monthly data submissions to the
Energy Data Center, other statistical releases from national administrations and most
recent market data also used in IEA Medium-Term Market Reports for coal, oil, gas and
renewables.
Both in the text of this book and in the tables, rounding may lead to minor differences
between totals and the sum of their individual components. Growth rates are calculated on
a compound average annual basis and are marked “n.a.” when the base year is zero or the
value exceeds 200%. Nil values are marked “-”.

Definitional note to the tables

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Total primary energy demand (TPED) is equivalent to power generation plus other energy
sector excluding electricity and heat, plus total final consumption (TFC) excluding electricity
and heat. TPED does not include ambient heat from heat pumps or electricity trade. Sectors
comprising TFC include industry, transport, buildings (residential, services and nonspecified other) and other (agriculture and non-energy use). Projected gross electrical
capacity is the sum of existing capacity and additions, less retirements.
Total CO2 includes emissions from other energy sector in addition to the power generation
and TFC sectors shown in the tables. CO2 emissions and energy demand from international
marine and aviation bunkers are included only at the world transport level. Gas use in
international bunkers is not itemised separately. CO2 emissions do not include emissions
from industrial waste and non-renewable municipal waste. For more information please
visit: www.iea.org/statistics/topics/CO2emissions.
Annex A | Southeast Asia projections

133

Southeast Asia: New Policies Scenario
Shares
(%)

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Energy demand (Mtoe)

CAAGR
(%)

2000

2015

2016e

2025

2030

2035

2040

2016e

2040

2016e-40

TPED
Coal
Oil
Gas
Nuclear
Hydro
Bioenergy
Other renewables

385
32
156
74
4
101
18

623
109
212
140
9
126
27

643
112
220
141
11
129
28

806
176
270
162
17
132
49

892
208
288
180
23
132
62

977
237
301
203
1
27
133
75

1 062
271
308
225
4
30
136
88

100
17
34
22
2
20
4

100
26
29
21
0
3
13
8

2.1
3.7
1.4
2.0
n.a.
4.4
0.2
4.8

Power generation
Coal
Oil
Gas
Nuclear
Hydro
Bioenergy
Other renewables

95
19
18
34
4
1
18

204
80
7
75
9
5
27

215
83
9
77
11
7
28

303
132
6
85
17
15
49

355
155
6
91
23
20
61

409
177
5
101
1
27
25
73

466
205
4
107
4
30
31
86

100
39
4
36
5
3
13

100
44
1
23
1
6
7
18

3.3
3.8
-3.0
1.4
n.a.
4.4
6.4
4.7

Other energy sector
Electricity

47
4

55
8

56
9

60
13

64
16

70
19

76
22

100
16

100
29

1.2
3.8

TFC
Coal
Oil
Gas
Electricity
Bioenergy
Other renewables

276
13
126
17
28
92
-

440
29
196
37
68
110
-

453
29
202
37
73
112
-

560
44
252
54
105
106
0

614
51
269
66
126
102
1

665
57
281
80
148
98
1

714
63
288
94
172
94
2

100
6
45
8
16
25
-

100
9
40
13
24
13
0

1.9
3.3
1.5
4.0
3.7
-0.7
n.a.

Industry
Coal
Oil
Gas
Electricity
Bioenergy
Other renewables

76
13
24
9
12
18
-

127
28
22
30
28
20
-

129
27
22
29
30
21
-

176
42
27
42
41
23
0

202
49
28
52
48
24
0

228
56
29
63
55
25
0

255
62
30
75
62
26
0

100
21
17
23
23
16
-

100
24
12
29
24
10
0

2.9
3.4
1.2
4.0
3.2
1.0
n.a.

Transport
Oil
Electricity
Biofuels
Other fuels

61
61
0
0

118
111
0
3
3

123
115
0
4
3

157
145
1
7
4

170
157
1
8
5

180
164
2
9
5

186
168
2
10
5

100
94
0
3
2

100
90
1
5
3

1.7
1.6
9.5
4.0
2.5

108
1
19
0
15
73
73
-

144
1
17
0
39
86
86
-

149
1
18
0
42
87
87
-

161
2
19
2
62
76
75
0

170
2
20
3
76
70
69
1

180
2
21
4
90
63
63
1

193
2
21
5
105
58
57
1

100
1
12
0
28
59
58
-

100
1
11
3
55
30
30
1

1.1
0.3
0.8
11.4
3.9
-1.7
-1.7
n.a.

30
20

51
33

52
34

68
46

72
49

76
52

79
54

100
23

100
28

1.8
2.0

Buildings
Coal
Oil
Gas
Electricity
Bioenergy
Traditional biomass
Other renewables
Other
Petrochem. feedstock

134

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

Southeast Asia: Current Policies and Sustainable Development Scenarios
Energy demand (Mtoe)
2025

2030

2040

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Current Policies

2025

Shares (%)

2030

2040

Sustainable Development

2040

CAAGR (%)
2016e-40

CPS

SDS

CPS

SDS

TPED
Coal
Oil
Gas
Nuclear
Hydro
Bioenergy
Other renewables

823
189
277
164
15
131
46

925
236
300
184
19
131
55

1 133
338
333
229
4
24
133
73

732
135
256
165
19
90
68

781
108
260
182
27
81
122

891
78
248
200
9
42
99
215

100
30
29
20
0
2
12
6

100
9
28
22
1
5
11
24

2.4
4.7
1.7
2.0
n.a.
3.4
0.1
4.0

1.4
-1.5
0.5
1.4
n.a.
5.9
-1.1
8.8

Power generation
Coal
Oil
Gas
Nuclear
Hydro
Bioenergy
Other renewables

312
145
6
86
15
15
45

372
181
6
93
19
19
54

503
266
5
105
4
24
27
71

290
94
6
88
19
17
66

332
63
5
95
27
23
119

419
28
3
90
9
42
38
209

100
53
1
21
1
5
5
14

100
7
1
22
2
10
9
50

3.6
5.0
-2.7
1.3
n.a.
3.4
5.8
3.9

2.8
-4.4
-4.5
0.7
n.a.
5.9
7.3
8.7

Other energy sector
Electricity

62
14

68
17

83
24

57
13

59
14

62
17

100
29

100
28

1.6
4.2

0.4
2.7

TFC
Coal
Oil
Gas
Electricity
Bioenergy
Other renewables

570
44
257
55
107
106
0

633
53
280
67
130
102
1

752
66
312
97
181
95
1

500
40
240
54
102
62
1

524
44
245
65
119
48
3

584
48
234
88
157
50
7

100
9
41
13
24
13
0

100
8
40
15
27
9
1

2.1
3.5
1.8
4.1
3.9
-0.7
n.a.

1.1
2.1
0.6
3.7
3.3
-3.3
n.a.

Industry
Coal
Oil
Gas
Electricity
Bioenergy
Other renewables

179
43
27
43
42
24
0

207
51
29
54
49
25
0

265
64
31
78
64
28
0

166
39
25
40
39
22
0

180
43
25
46
42
23
1

211
47
25
60
52
24
3

100
24
12
30
24
10
0

100
22
12
29
24
11
1

3.0
3.6
1.3
4.2
3.3
1.2
n.a.

2.1
2.3
0.5
3.1
2.3
0.6
n.a.

Transport
Oil
Electricity
Biofuels
Other fuels

160
150
0
6
4

178
166
1
7
4

203
188
1
8
5

151
134
1
10
5

158
134
3
14
7

156
119
8
18
11

100
93
1
4
3

100
76
5
12
7

2.1
2.1
6.3
3.2
2.4

1.0
0.1
15.2
6.5
5.8

Buildings
Coal
Oil
Gas
Electricity
Bioenergy
Traditional biomass
Other renewables

163
2
20
2
64
76
75
0

175
2
21
3
80
70
69
0

205
2
23
5
114
58
57
1

116
2
20
3
61
30
29
1

114
1
22
5
73
11
9
2

138
1
23
8
96
7
6
3

100
1
11
3
56
28
28
0

100
0
17
6
70
5
4
3

1.3
1.6
1.2
11.4
4.3
-1.7
-1.7
n.a.

-0.3
-3.9
1.1
13.1
3.5
-10.1
-10.8
n.a.

68
45

72
49

80
54

68
46

72
49

79
55

100
26

100
40

1.8
2.0

1.8
2.1

Other
Petrochem. feedstock

Annex A | Southeast Asia projections

135

A

Southeast Asia: New Policies Scenario
Shares
(%)

Electricity generation (TWh)
2000

2015

2016e

2025

2030

2035

2040

2016e

2040

370

867

918

1 341

1 617

1 905

2 219

100

100

Coal

79

308

321

548

655

764

898

35

40

4.4

Oil

72

30

35

21

21

18

15

4

1

-3.5

Gas

154

384

395

455

501

569

630

43

28

2.0

-

-

-

-

-

2

16

-

1

n.a.

Renewables

65

145

167

317

440

553

659

18

30

5.9

Hydro

47

109

124

193

263

312

347

14

16

4.4

Bioenergy

1

12

15

43

58

76

97

2

4

8.1

Wind

-

1

1

13

22

36

55

0

2

16.7

16

21

22

42

54

65

75

2

3

5.2

0

3

4

25

43

63

85

0

4

13.5

Total generation

Nuclear

Geothermal
Solar PV

Shares
(%)

Electrical capacity (GW)

2016e-40
3.7

CAAGR
(%)

2015

2016e

2025

2030

2035

2040

2016e

2040

228

241

349

418

490

566

100

100

Coal

62

66

107

123

139

160

27

28

3.8

Oil

25

26

24

22

19

13

11

2

-2.8

Gas

88

93

116

132

156

181

39

32

2.8

-

-

-

-

1

2

-

0

n.a.

Renewables

53

57

102

141

176

210

23

37

5.6

Hydro

39

41

61

82

96

105

17

19

4.1

Bioenergy

7

7

12

14

16

19

3

3

3.9

Wind

1

1

5

9

14

22

0

4

13.8

Geothermal

3

3

6

8

10

11

1

2

5.1

Solar PV

3

4

17

28

40

53

2

9

11.1

Total capacity

Nuclear

Shares
(%)

CO2 emissions (Mt)

2016e-40
3.6

CAAGR
(%)

2000

2015

2016e

2025

2030

2035

2040

2016e

2040

692

1 242

1 278

1 682

1 885

2 080

2 273

100

100

2.4

Coal

134

439

453

710

833

950

1 083

35

48

3.7

Oil

413

508

529

636

681

712

729

41

32

1.3

Gas

146

295

297

336

371

418

461

23

20

1.9

217
78

520
322

543
335

749
532

856
624

966
714

1 087
823

100
62

100
76

2.9
3.8
-3.0

Total CO2

Power generation
Coal

© OECD/IEA, 2017

CAAGR
(%)

2016e-40

Oil

58

23

27

18

18

16

13

5

1

Gas

81

175

181

199

214

237

251

33

23

1.4

TFC
Coal

410
55

649
118

663
118

867
178

964
209

1 046
236

1 116
261

100
18

100
23

2.2
3.4

Oil

333

468

485

598

642

672

690

73

62

1.5

185

333

345

434

468

491

502

52

45

1.6

21

63

60

92

113

138

165

9

15

4.3

Transport
Gas

136

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

Southeast Asia: Current Policies and Sustainable Development Scenarios
Electricity generation (TWh)
2025
Total generation
Coal

2030

2040

Current Policies
1 380
1 683
2 352
601

766

1 178

2025

Shares (%)
2030

2040

Sustainable Development
1 299
1 520
1 997
392

268

128

2016e-40

CPS
100

SDS
100

CPS

SDS

6

4.0
5.6

50

3.3
-3.8
-5.2

Oil

24

23

16

22

16

10

1

0

-3.2

Gas

461

514

627

484

533

534

27

27

1.9

1.3

-

-

14

-

-

36

1

2

n.a.

n.a.

Renewables

295

380

517

402

703

1 289

22

65

4.8

8.9

Hydro

180

227

281

216

315

492

12

25

3.5

5.9

Bioenergy

43

55

85

48

70

123

4

6

7.5

9.2

Wind

13

20

35

43

125

246

1

12

14.5

24.2

Geothermal

39

48

64

59

107

183

3

9

4.5

9.2

Solar PV

21

31

52

36

85

243

2

12

11.2

18.6

2025

2030

2030

2040

Nuclear

Electrical capacity (GW)
2040

Current Policies
Total capacity
Coal

349
115

416
142

557
215

2025

Shares (%)

CAAGR (%)

2040

2016e-40

Sustainable Development

CPS

SDS

CPS

SDS

367
92

100
39

100
9

3.6
5.0

4.4
-0.2
-2.9

472
84

677
63

Oil

24

22

13

23

22

12

2

2

-2.7

Gas

118

135

173

114

119

133

31

20

2.6

1.5

-

-

2

-

-

5

0

1

n.a.

n.a.

Renewables

93

118

154

137

247

464

28

69

4.3

9.2

Hydro

56

70

85

70

99

151

15

22

3.1

5.6

Bioenergy

12

13

17

13

16

24

3

4

3.4

5.0

5

8

13

20

55

100

2

15

11.3

21.2

Nuclear

Wind
Geothermal
Solar PV

6

7

9

9

16

27

2

4

4.3

9.0

14

20

30

26

60

161

5

24

8.6

16.4

2025

2030

2030

2040

CO2 emissions (Mt)
2040

Current Policies
Total CO2
Coal

2025

Shares (%)

Sustainable Development

CAAGR (%)

2040

2016e-40

CPS

SDS

CPS

SDS

1 759
763

2 039
942

2 615
1 345

1 481
544

1 399
427

1 203
261

100
51

100
22

3.0
4.6

-0.2
-2.3

Oil

656

717

802

596

598

544

31

45

1.8

0.1

Gas

340

380

468

342

375

398

18

33

1.9

1.2

802
582

964
726

1 333
1 072

605
380

489
251

302
81

100
80

100
27

3.8
5.0

-2.4
-5.8
-4.5

Power generation
Coal

© OECD/IEA, 2017

CAAGR (%)

2040

Oil

20

20

14

18

15

9

1

3

-2.7

Gas

201

218

248

207

223

212

19

70

1.3

0.7

TFC
Coal

889
181

1 006
215

1 204
273

817
164

854
175

851
180

100
23

100
21

2.5
3.6

1.0
1.8

Oil

615

675

761

561

567

520

63

61

1.9

0.3

448

496

562

401

401

354

47

42

2.1

0.1

93

115

170

92

112

151

14

18

4.4

3.9

Transport
Gas

Annex A | Southeast Asia projections

137

A

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Annex B
Units and conversion factors
This annex provides general information on units, and conversion factors for energy.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Units
Coal

Mtce

million tonnes of coal equivalent (equals 0.7 Mtoe)

Emissions

ppm
Gt CO2-eq

g CO2/km
g CO2/kWh

parts per million (by volume)
gigatonnes of carbon-dioxide equivalent (using
100-year global warming potentials for different
greenhouse gases)
grammes of carbon dioxide per kilometre
grammes of carbon dioxide per kilowatt-hour

Energy

Mtoe
MBtu
Gcal
TJ
kWh
MWh
GWh
TWh

million tonnes of oil equivalent
million British thermal units
gigacalorie (1 calorie x 109)
terajoule (1 joule x 1012)
kilowatt-hour
megawatt-hour
gigawatt-hour
terawatt-hour

Gas

bcm

billion cubic metres

Mass

kg
kt
Mt
Gt

kilogramme (1 000 kg = 1 tonne)
kilotonnes (1 tonne x 103)
million tonnes (1 tonne x 106)
gigatonnes (1 tonne x 109)

Monetary

$ million
$ billion
$ trillion

1 US dollar x 106
1 US dollar x 109
1 US dollar x 1012

Oil

b/d
mb/d

barrel per day
million barrels per day

Power

kW
MW
GW

kilowatt (1 watt x 103)
megawatt (1 watt x 106)
gigawatt (1 watt x 109)

Annex B | Units and conversion factors

139

Energy conversions
Convert to:

Gcal

Mtoe

MBtu

GWh

1

238.8

2.388 x 10-5

947.8

0.2778

Gcal

4.1868 x 10-3

1

10-7

3.968

1.163 x 10-3

Mtoe

4.1868 x 104

107

1

3.968 x 107

11 630

MBtu

1.0551 x 10

-3

1

2.931 x 10-4

GWh

3.6

3 412

1

From:

© OECD/IEA, 2017

TJ

140

TJ
multiply by:

-8

0.252

2.52 x 10

860

8.6 x 10-5

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

Annex C
References
Chapter 1: Energy in Southeast Asia today
ACE (ASEAN Centre for Energy) (2017), ASEAN Power Cooperation Report,
www.aseanenergy.org/resources/reports/asean-power-cooperation-report/,
accessed
5 September 2017.
ADB (Asian Development Bank) (2016), Myanmar energy sector assesment, strategy, and
road map, www.adb.org/sites/default/files/institutional-document/218286/mya-energysector-assessment.pdf, accessed 11 May 2017.
– (2015), Viet Nam Energy sector assesment, strategy, and road map.
www.adb.org/sites/default/files/institutional-document/178616/vie-energy-road-map.pdf,
accessed 25 August 2017.
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) (2017), Electronics,
http://investasean.asean.org/index.php/page/view/electronics, accessed 27 August 2017.
– (2016), ASEAN Investment Report 2016, ASEAN Secretariat, Jakarta, Indonesia.
ASEAN Automotive Federation (2017), Statistics, www.asean-autofed.com/statistics.html,
accessed 18 September 2017.
EGAT (Electricity Generating Authority of Thailand) (2016), Small Power Producers
www.egat.co.th/en/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=319&Itemid=202,
accessed 6 August 2017.
EPPO (Energy Policy and Planning Office) (2016), Electricity statistcs, Thailand Ministry of
Energy , accessed 5 September 2017.
EVN (Vietnam Electricity) (2016), It is necessary to act immediately so that the South does
not lack electricity, www.evn.com.vn/d6/news/Can-hanh-dong-ngay-de-mien-Nam-khongthieu-dien-0-12-18682.aspx, accessed 9 May 2017.
GSI (Global Subsidies Initiative) (2016), International Experiences With LPG Subsidy Reform.
www.iisd.org/sites/default/files/publications/international-experiences-with-LPG-subsidyreform.pdf, accessed 25 August 2017.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Hijioka et al. (2014), in “Climate Change 2014: Impact, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part
B: Regional Aspects Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change”, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
United Kingdom and New York, NY, United States.
IEA (Interntional Energy Agency) (2017), Tracking fossil-fuel subsidies in APEC economies,
www.iea.org/publications/insights/insightpublications/tracking-fossil-fuel-subsidies-inapec-economies, accessed May 2017.

Annex C | References

141

McCoy Power Reports (2017), Dataset, McCoy Power Reports, Richmond, VA, United
States.
MEMR (Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources of Indonesia) (2017a), Minister of Energy
and Mines suggest LPG subsidy of 3kg included in Family Indentity Cards,
www.esdm.go.id/id/media-center/arsip-berita/menteri-esdm-usulkan-subsidi-lpg-3-kgmasuk-ke-kartu-keluarga-sejahtera, accessed 10 May 2017.
– (2017b), KEBIJAKAN SUBSIDI LISTRIK TEPAT SASARAN RUMAH TANGGA DAYA 900 VA
(Policy Subsidy Policy Target - Household House 900 VA), www.esdm.go.id/assets/media/
content/content-kebijakan-subsidi-listrik-tepat-sasaran-rumah-tangga-daya-900-va.pdf,
accessed 10 May 2017.
Ministry of Electricity and Energy, Republic of the Union of Myanmar (2017), Current status
and opportunities in Myanmar electricity and energy, www.jccp.or.jp/international/
conference/docs/Myanmar%20Presentation%20for%20Japan%20Symposium%202017.pdf,
accessed 11 May 2017.
PLN (Perusahaan Listrik Negara) (2017), Potential and challenges for off-grid photovoltaic
project,
http://indonesien.ahk.de/fileadmin/ahk_indonesien/Business_Delegations/
Photovoltaik/presentations/2._Winner_Sianipar_PLN_POTENTIAL_AND_CHALLENGES_FOR
_OFF_GRID_PHOTOVOLTAIC_PROJECT.pdf, accessed 11 May 2017.
UNPD (United Nations Population
https://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp.

Division) (2015), World Population Prospects,

World Bank (2017), Enterprise Surveys, www.enterprisesurveys.org/data/exploretopics/
infrastructure#2, accessed 24 August 2017.
– (2016), Manufacturing value added,
http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NV.IND.MANF.ZS, accessed 24 June 2017.
– (2015a), Myanmar Investment Climate Assessment, World Bank, Washington, DC.
– (2015b), National Electrification Project, http://projects.worldbank.org/P152936?lang=en,
accessed 1 September 2017.
– (2013), Turn Down the Heat: Climate Extremes, Regional Impacts and the Case for
Resilience, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Chapter 2: Southeast Asia’s energy prospects to 2040

© OECD/IEA, 2017

ACE (ASEAN Centre for Energy) (2015), ASEAN Plan of Action for Energy Cooperation 20162025, www.aseanenergy.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/12/HighRes-APAEC-online-versionfinal.pdf, accessed 14 July 2017.
APERC (Asia Pacific Energy Research Centre) (2015), Follow-up Peer Review on Energy
Efficiency in Thailand, http://aperc.ieej.or.jp/file/2016/2/1/Final_Report_Followup_PREE_in_Thailand_20160128_pub2.pdf, accessed 21 July 2017.
142

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

ASEAN (Association of Southeast Asian Nations) (2017), Electronics,
http://investasean.asean.org/index.php/page/view/electronics, accessed 27 August 2017.
BGR (German Federal Institute for Geosciences and Natural Resources) (2015),
Energiestudie 2015, Reserven, Ressourcen und Verfügbarkeit von Energierohstoffen, (Energy
Study 2015, Reserves, Resources and Availability of Energy Resources), BGR, Hannover,
Germany.
BP (2016), BP Statistical Review of World Energy 2016, BP, London.
BPPT (Badan Pengkajian dan Penerapan Teknologi) (2016), Indonesia Energy Outlook,
www.bppt.go.id/outlook-energi, accessed 14 July 2017.
ECCJ (Energy Conservation Center) (2017), Project on Measures for Rationalization of
International Energy Use, www.meti.go.jp/meti_lib/report/H28FY/000047.pdf, accessed
7 July 2017.
EESL (Energy Efficiency Services Limited and International Energy Agency) (2017), India's
UJALA Story, https://eeslindia.org/writereaddata/Ujala%20Case%20study.pdf.
EESL (Energy Efficency Services Limited) (2016), UJALA Scheme, https://eeslindia.org/
User_Panel/UserView.aspx?TypeID=1170, accessed 24 July 2017.
EGAT (Electricity Generating Authority of Thailand) (2016). Small Power Producers,
www.egat.co.th/en/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=319&Itemid=202,
accessed 6 August 2017.
EPPO (Energy Policy and Planning Office, Thailand Ministry of Energy) (2017), Policy and
Promotion of Electric Vehicles in Thailand, www.eppo.go.th/images/Infromation_service/
NEWS/2017/04April/19Apr/EIT_18-04-2017.pdf, accessed 21 July 2017.
IEA (International Energy Agency) (2017a), Global EV Outlook 2017, www.iea.org/
publications/freepublications/publication/GlobalEVOutlook2017.pdf, accessed 21 July 2017.
– (2017b) Future of Trucks, www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/thefuture-of-trucks---implications-for-energy-and-the-environment.html, accessed 29 August
2017.
– (2017c), World Energy Investment 2017, OECD/IEA, Paris.
– (2016), Energy Efficiency Market Report 2016, www.iea.org/publications/freepublications
/publication/energy-efficiency-market-report-2016.html, accessed 10 September 2017.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

– (2015), Southeast Asia Energy Outlook-2015: World Energy Outlook Special Report,
http://www.worldenergyoutlook.org/southeastasiaenergyoutlook/.
JRAIA (Japan Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Industry Association) (2017), World Air
Conditioner Demand by Region, www.jraia.or.jp/english/World_AC_Demand.pdf, accessed
20 July 2017.

Annex C | References

143

C

McCoy Power Reports (2017), Dataset, McCoy Power Reports, Richmond, VA, United
States.
OGJ (Oil and Gas Journal) (2015), Reserves Grow Modestly as Crude Oil Production Climbs,
OGJ 113 (12), Pennwell Corporation, Oklahoma City, OK, United States.
US DOE/EIA/ARI (US Department of Energy / Energy Information Administration / Advanced
Resources International) (2013 and update December 2014), Technically Recoverable Shale
Oil and Shale Gas Resources: An Assessment of 137 Shale Formations in 41 Countries
Outside the United States, US DOE/EIA, Washington, DC.
USGS (United States Geological Survey) (2012a), “Assessment of Potential Additions to
Conventional Oil and Gas Resources of the World (outside the United States) from Reserve
Growth”, Fact Sheet 2012-3052, USGS, Boulder, Colorado, United States.
– (2012b) “An Estimate of Undiscovered Conventional Oil and Gas Resources of the World”,
Fact Sheet 2012-3042, USGS, Boulder, Colorado, United States.
World Bank (2016), Enterprise Surveys
infrastructure, accessed 26 July 2017.

www.enterprisesurveys.org/data/exploretopics/

World Bank (2016), Manufacturing value added, http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/
NV.IND.MANF.ZS, accessed 24 June 2017.

Chapter 3: Addressing Southeast Asia’s energy priorities
ADB (Asian Development Bank) (2017), ADB Backs Sunseap to Build Cambodia's First LargeScale Solar Farm, www.adb.org/news/adb-backs-sunseap-build-cambodias-first-largescale-solar-farm, accessed 13 September 2017.
– (2011), Energy for all: Viet Nam’s Success in Increasing Access to Energy through Rural
Electrification, ADB, Mandaluyong City, Philippines.
Atmo et al., (2017), “Comparative performance of PPPs and traditional procurement
projects in Indonesia", International Journal of Public Sector Management, Vol. 30 Issue: 2.
BCAP (Building Codes Assistance Project) (2017), Code Status, http://bcapcodes.org/codestatus/, accessed 13 September 2017.
CEM (Clean Energy Ministerial) (2015), Public-Private Roundtables at the Sixth Clean Energy
Ministerial, May 2015, Mérida, Mexico, www.CEM6-Roundtables-Summary-Report.pdf.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Chaichana, C. (2017), Community Renewable Energy Implementation in Thailand,
http://jastip.org/sites/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/JASTIP-Annual-WorkshopChatchawan.pdf, accessed 24 July 2017.
CLASP (2017), Global Standards & Labeling Database, http://clasp.ngo/en/Tools/Tools/
SL_Search.aspx, accessed 13 September 2017.

144

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

EES (Energy Efficient Strategies) and Maia Consulting (2014), Energy Standards and
Labelling Programs throughout the World in 2013, www.iea-4e.org/document/343/energystandardslabelling-programs-throughout-the-world-in-2013, accessed 18 September 2017.
Electricité du Cambodge (2016), Annual Report 2015, www.edc.com.kh/images/
Annual%20Report%202015%20Publish_EnglishVersion.pd, accessed 17 July 2017.
Electricity Authority of Cambodia (2016), Report on Power Sector of the Kingdom of
Cambodia, http://eac.gov.kh/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/Annual-Report-2015English.pdf, accessed 17 July 2017.
GBPN (Global Buildings Performance
www.gbpn.org/databases-tools.

Network)

(2017),

Databases

and

Tools,

Hermawanto, B. (2016), “ASEAN Power Grid: Route to Multilateral Electricity Trade”,
presentation at Asia Clean Energy Forum, Manila, Philippines.
Ibrahim, S. (2016), ASEAN Power Market Integration for Electricity Supply Security,
presentation at the AEMI-HAPUA Forum, May 2016, Jakarta, www.asean-aemi.org/wpcontent/uploads/2016/05/AEMI-Forum-PoweringASEAN-May2016-Syaiful-Ibrahim.pdf.
ICCT (International Council on Clean Transport) (2017), TransportPolicy.Net,
http://transportpolicy.net/index.php?title=Main_Page.
IEA (International Energy Agency) (2017a), Energy Technlogy Perspectives 2017, OECD/IEA,
Paris.
– (2017b) Energy Access Outlook: from Poverty to Prosperity: World Energy Outlook Special
Report, OECD/IEA, Paris.
– (2017c) Mobility Model, www.iea.org/etp/etpmodel/transport.
– (2017d), Policy and Measures Energy Efficiency Database,
policiesandmeasures/energyefficiency/, accessed 18 September 2017.

www.iea.org/

– (2016), World Energy Outlook-2016, OECD/IEA, Paris.
IEA 4E-TCP (Energy Efficiency End-use Equipment, Technology Collaboration Programme)
(2016-2017), Benchmark and Policy Reports, https://mappingandbenchmarking.iea4e.org/matrix, accessed 25 September 2017.
IIP (Institute for Industrial Productivity) (2017), Industrial Efficiency Policy Database,
http://iepd.iipnetwork.org/.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

Ikejemba et al. (2017), “The empirical reality and sustainable management failures of
renewable energy projects in Sub-Saharan Africa” (part 1 of 2), Renewable Energy, Vol.102,
pp. 234-240.
MEMR (Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources of Indonesia) (2016), “Way Forward for
Oil and Gas Development in Indonesia”, http://techno-forum.jogmec.go.jp/2016/english/
detail/files/day1/presentation/03_Dr_Djoko_Siswanto.pdf, accessed 19 July 2017.
Annex C | References

145

C

Mindanao Development Authority (2017), “Mindanao sees an uptrend in renewable energy
projects”, http://minda.gov.ph/news/137-mindanao-sees-an-uptrend-in-renewable-energyprojects, accessed 5 July 2017.
Ministry of Mines and Energy of Cambodia (2016), Current status of renewable energy in
Cambodia, www.irena.org/eventdocs/Cambodia%20presentation.pdf.
Nai, C. (2015), “Power Interconnections in the Greater Mekong Sub-region”, presentation
by Asian Development Bank, Sustainable Hydropower and Regional Cooperation in
Myanmar, Nay Pyi Taw.
National Institute of Statistics, Cambodia (2015), Cambodia Socio-economic Survey Reports,
www.nis.gov.kh/index.php/en/14-cses/12-cambodia-socio-economic-survey-reports,
accessed 19 September 2017.
NEA (National Electrification Administration) (2016), Status of Energization as of December
2016,
www.nea.gov.ph/status-of-energization/category/119-2016-monthly-reports,
accessed 19 July 2017.
NPC (National Power Corporation, The Philippines) (2016), Annual Report 2015,
www.napocor.gov.ph/images/Reports/annual_reports/AnnualReport_2015.pdf, accessed
1 September 2017.
Odysee-Mure (2017), Mure Database, www.odyssee-mure.eu, accessed 11 July 2017.
Siemens (2015), Minimum Energy Performance Standards: MEPS Regulations Worldwide,
www.industry.siemens.com/.
SMI (Sarana Multi Infrastruktur) (2017), www.Company-Profile-PT-SMI-April-2017-ID.pdf.

© OECD/IEA, 2017

World Bank (2015), Electricity to Transform Rural Myanmar, www.worldbank.org/en/
news/feature/2015/09/16/electricity-to-transform-rural-myanmar, accessed 15 June 2017.

146

World Energy Outlook 2017 | Special Report

.

ab

le

To ge t her

Internationa
l

iea

E-mai

w

y Agency

0% discou
s at 2
nt

erg
En

PD

io n
er s

or

o o ks
b
/
g

Fv

Onl
in
w w.

e

kshop
o
o
b

l: bo

S e c u re S u s t

ai

n

oks
@

iea
g
. or
Global Gas
Security
series

Energy
Policies
Beyond IEA
Countries
series

Energy
Technology
Perspectives
series

Energy
Statistics
series

World
Energy
Outlook
series

Energy
Policies
of IEA
Countries
series

Oil

Gas

Coal

Renewable
Energy

World
Energy
Investment
series

Market
Report
Series
Energy
Efficiency

IEA Publications,
International Energy Agency
Website: www.iea.org
Contact information: www.iea.org/aboutus/contactus

This publication reﬂects the views of the IEA Secretariat but does not necessarily reﬂect
those of individual IEA member countries. The IEA makes no representation or
warranty, express or implied, in respect of the publication’s contents (including its
completeness or accuracy) and shall not be responsible for any use of, or reliance on,
the publication. Unless otherwise indicated, all material presented in figures and tables
is derived from IEA data and analysis.

This publication and any map included herein are without prejudice to the status
of or sovereignty over any territory, to the delimitation of international frontiers
and boundaries and to the name of any territory, city or area.

IEA/OECD possible corrigenda on: www.oecd.org/about/publishing/corrigenda.htm

Layout in France by IEA, October 2017
Cover design: IEA, photo credits: ShutterStock

Southeast
Asia Energy
Outlook

2017

The ten Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
countries are among the most dynamic parts of the global energy
system and a rising force in international energy affairs. Thanks
to its growing partnership with Southeast Asia, the International
Energy Agency (IEA) has conducted regular in-depth studies of the
energy challenges facing this region. This new report, which was
prepared as part of the IEA’s flagship World Energy Outlook series,
provides insights for policy makers, industry and other energy
stakeholders to help address the energy sector challenges facing
Southeast Asia today.
The report highlights:
n

 he state of play across the Southeast Asia’s energy sector, based
T
on the latest data and announcements.

n

 ow today’s policies shape this region’s energy demand and
H
supply outlook to 2040, and the implications for energy security,
the environment and development.

n

 he opportunities that broader changes in global markets and
T
low-carbon technologies open up for Southeast Asia.

n

 he investment required to improve efficiency and expand
T
energy supply infrastructure, especially in the electricity sector.

n

 he mix of fuels and technologies that can help Southeast
T
Asia achieve universal electricity access.

n

 n alternative pathway, the Sustainable Development
A
Scenario, to meet energy security and environmental
goals.

years of World Energy Outlook
for more information visit www.iea.org/southeastasia


